**The Power of the Daleks**  
  
Original Airdate: 5 Nov, 1966  

_Transcribers note - this story exists in audio only._

__**Episode One**__

**[Tardis]**

(The Doctor has regenerated after his ordeal with the Cybermen and energy-
draining Mondas. Ben and Polly watched him change into a younger person.)  
POLLY: His face, his hair, look at it.  
BEN: He's breathing, and the Tardis seems to be normal.  
POLLY: Ben, what are we going to do? We can't just leave the Doctor there.  
BEN: What, him? The Doctor?  
POLLY: Well, that's who came through the doors. There was no one else outside.
Ben, do you remember what he said in the tracking room? Something about 'This
old body of mine is wearing a bit thin.'  
BEN: So he gets himself a new one?  
POLLY: Well, yes.  
BEN: Oh, do me a favour.  
POLLY: Then whatever happened, happened in here.  
BEN: But it's impossible.  
POLLY: Not so long ago we'd have been saying that about a lot of things.  
(The man on the floor moans and opens his eyes. As he struggles to sit up, a
searing pain nearly cripples him. Clutching his head, he stares wildly at Ben
and Polly, his vision blurred. We hear the thumping of his headache, or is it
heartbeat?)  
DOCTOR: Stop. Stop. Concentrate on one thing. One thing.  
(The man turns his attention to the Tardis console, focusing on the controls.
The thumping becomes slower and softer. At last his vision clears. The man
removes his hands from his face and looks around him, his features brightening
in relief.)  
DOCTOR: It's over. (chuckles) It's over.  
(The man scrambles to his feet, wobbling unsteadily. Ben and Polly watch but
make no attempt to help as he circles the Tardis console as if reacquainting
himself with the controls. His clothes hang off his slight frame, much too
big, and he struggles to unfasten the heavy cloak that threatens to trip him
up. As he does so, an ornate ring drops to the floor.)  
BEN: Doctor?  
(As the Tardis engine springs to life and dematerialises, the man raises his
hands to his face once more, feeling his features as if they belonged to a
stranger. Polly moves to pick up the fallen ring, eyeing the newcomer with
open curiosity and a little unease. The little man makes his way over to a
storage chest, his stiff-legged gait reminding Polly of a small child learning
to walk. He trips, but recovers quickly.)  
DOCTOR: The muscles are still a bit tight.  
BEN: What are we going to do?  
POLLY: It is the Doctor. I know it is. I think.  
BEN: It's not only his face that's changed. He doesn't even act like him.  
(The stranger is rummaging through the contents of the chest.)  
BEN: Come on, it's time we sorted this out. Now look here!  
DOCTOR: Hold that.  
(He hands Ben a mirror.)  
DOCTOR: Tilt it.  
(The man gazes intently at his reflection. The face in the mirror has a mop of
black hair and dark green eyes. Momentarily the image blurs and changes to
that of an older, white-haired man before changing back again. Apparently
satisfied, the man turns his attention back to the storage chest.)  
BEN: Have you done with this?  
DOCTOR: Put it down. Put it down.  
BEN: Now what's the game?  
(The man turns, cheerfully brandishing an ornamental dagger.)  
DOCTOR: Ah! The Crusades, from Saladin. The Doctor was a great collector,
wasn't he?  
POLLY: But you're the Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Oh, I don't look like him.  
BEN: Who are we?  
DOCTOR: Don't you know?  
(The man rummages further and pulls out a piece of dull silver metal. His look
of mischief fades as the object triggers a very clear memory.)  
DOCTOR: Extermination.  
(The man stuffs the metal into his pocket. His concern turns to delight as he
unearths a magnifying glass. He begins a careful study of his hands.)  
DOCTOR: Ah. Very good. Nails need growing.  
(Ben takes the Doctor's ring from Polly.)  
BEN: Now look, the Doctor always wore this. So if you're him, it should fit
now, shouldn't it?  
(And slips it on the man's finger. It's far too big.)  
BEN: There. That settles it.  
DOCTOR: I'd like to see a butterfly fit into a chrysalis case after it's
spread its wings.  
POLLY: Then you did change!  
DOCTOR: Life depends on change and renewal.  
BEN: Oh, so that's it. You've been renewed, have you?  
DOCTOR: I've been renewed, have I? That's it. I've been renewed. It's part of
the Tardis. Without it, I couldn't survive. Come here.  
(Unexpectedly, the man rounds on Polly.)  
DOCTOR: Come here.  
(Still rather nervous of this strange interloper, Polly steps closer.)  
DOCTOR: The Doctor kept a diary, didn't he?  
POLLY: Yes.  
DOCTOR: I thought so. I wonder where. I wonder where.  
(Ben and Polly watch as the man resumes his search of the chest.)  
POLLY: He's a very different Doctor, Ben.  
BEN: Yeah, maybe. Just where do we stand, though?  
(The man has found something else in the chest. A descant recorder. He removes
it with great care and stands flexing his fingers over the holes. His
expression is one of pure child-like joy, and convinces Polly that it's time
for her to trust her instincts about the man's identity. He plays a little
tune and dances a jig, stopping when he spots the missing diary.)  
POLLY: Doctor?  
(Tucking the recorder into his jacket, the Doctor begins to read.)  
POLLY: Doctor, what's going to happen to us?  
DOCTOR: I think. I think we must have landed for sometime. I think it's time
we went for a stroll.  
(The Doctor grabs a stove-pipe hat from the chest. Engrossed in his reading,
he moves to the console and opens the Tardis doors.)  
POLLY: But you don't know where we've landed!  
BEN: No, you haven't checked the oxygen or the temperature or anything!  
DOCTOR: (still reading the diary) Oxygen density 172, radiation nil,
temperature 86. Strong suggestion of mercury deposits. Satisfied, Ben? Now,
are you two coming or are you not?  
POLLY: He does know us. He said Ben. Didn't you hear him?  
BEN: Yeah, I heard. But he might just have been copying you though, mightn't
he?

**[Mercury swamp]**

(The Tardis has landed in a misty swamp. The ground is rocky and pitted with
small bubbling pools which occasionally spray a fine silver mist into the air.
The Doctor wanders away, still fascinated by the contents of the diary.
Strolling directly towards a small pool of mercury, he is apparently oblivious
to any danger, yet manages to successfully circumnavigate the obstacle without
once looking up from his reading. Suddenly realising what he's done, he stops
and looks back, delighted at having outwitted the obstruction and laughs. But
then he looks down and sloshes out of the watery puddle in which he is now
standing.)  
DOCTOR: Are you coming, you two?  
(The Doctor continues on his way. After a short distance he stops once more. A
boulder blocks his path. Pulling a tape measure from his pocket, he takes some
extensive measurements of the rock, and scribbles some calculations on an
empty page of the diary. The Doctor glances round him. The boulder stands in a
clearing and he could easily walk round it, but a look of mischief crosses his
face. Backing up a few steps, the Doctor looks down at his legs, flexing his
knees.)  
DOCTOR: Time I put you through some tests, I think.  
(Breaking into a run, the Doctor successfully leap-frogs the boulder.)  
EXAMINER: Hello?  
(A newcomer has entered the clearing.)  
EXAMINER: Hello? Is there anyone there? Hello? Hello? Why don't they come?
(sees the Doctor) Ah, so you've come at last. I'm from Earth. I'm the
Examiner.  
(There's a gun shot. The man crumples to the ground. Horrified, the Doctor's
about to dive for cover then pauses and, keeping low, approaches the fallen
figure. He rolls the man over, and sees that he is dead. Searching for some
kind of identification, the Doctor finds a large round badge. Automatically
reaching into his top pocket he pulls out a pair of wire-rimmed spectacles and
puts them on. He squints at the badge and moves it backwards and forwards,
trying to focus on it, yet all he can see is a misty blur. He removes the
spectacles and tries again. This time the text is clear.)  
DOCTOR: Earth Examiner. Accord every access. Vulcan.  
(Behind the Doctor, a figure looms out of the mist, wearing an all-concealing
white suit and goggles. The figure trains a pistol on the Doctor's back.)  
BEN: Doctor, where are you?  
(The Doctor turns. The figure dodges out of sight. Close to the Tardis, Ben
and Polly are exploring the swamp.)  
BEN: Phwoar, ain't it hot.  
POLLY: Do you think the air's like this everywhere?  
BEN: Nah, might be just around here. Don't want too many lungfuls of it, I
know that. Here, when I was a kid, we used to live opposite a brewery. You
could take a walk and get tipsy all in one go.  
POLLY: It's beautiful.  
BEN: No, don't touch it, Polly.  
POLLY: I wasn't going to.  
BEN: No, it's quicksilver. It gets through the pores. Where is the Doctor, or
whatever he is, got to?  
(As Ben moves away, a cloud of mercury vapour catches Polly full in the face.
She coughs.)  
BEN: What's the matter? Hey, Polly! Hey, Doctor, wherever you are. Quick,
there's something happening to Polly!  
(The Doctor heads back to the Tardis at a run.)  
BEN: Quick! Over this way!  
(Pistol raised as a bludgeon, the suited figure steps out behind the Doctor
and knocks him down. The Doctor grabs at the figure briefly before sinking to
the ground, unconscious. Working quickly, the stranger presses something into
the Doctor's palm then drags the Examiner's body away. The Doctor is left
sprawled on the ground, a button clutched in his outstretched hand.)  
(Meanwhile, Ben is trying to drag the unconscious Polly to safety. Another
cloud of mercury vapour rises from the pool.)  
BEN: Doctor!  
(The last thing Ben sees before he passes out, is a white suited figure
holding a pistol approaching fast.)  
(Some time later, a young man in a white survival suit, goggles pushed up over
his head, is kneeling besides the seemingly unconscious Doctor. Another older
man, similarly attired, approaches.)  
BRAGEN: Ah, Quinn, there you are. What have you got there? My people have
found two more of them by one of the pools.  
QUINN: This one's got a nasty bruise on the back of his head. Fallen over his
feet and knocked himself out, I suppose.  
BRAGEN: I suppose so.  
QUINN: Why don't they use the kit we send them?  
BRAGEN: Yes. The other two have had a rather bad dose of fumes. The girl has,
anyway.  
QUINN: Girl?  
BRAGEN: Yes, but she'll recover.  
(Ben and Polly are helped into the clearing by two guards.)  
QUINN: These comic opera guards of yours do have some uses after all.  
BRAGEN: I pick them for their physical fitness.  
QUINN: I thought it wasn't for their IQ. Give me a hand with the Examiner,
will you.  
BRAGEN: I wonder why Earth has chosen to send an Examiner to Vulcan? Just now,
I mean.  
QUINN: I don't know.  
BRAGEN: It's a mystery, isn't it? He isn't due for another two years.  
(Ben is recovering.)  
QUINN: How do you feel?  
BEN: (cough) Urgh.  
QUINN: We saw your rocket overshoot the landing area.  
BEN: Ay?  
QUINN: Don't worry. Most of the ships from Earth do over-shoot. I'm Quinn,
Deputy Governor.  
BRAGEN: Bragen, Head of Security.  
QUINN: Let's get them all back, shall we? I'll take the girl.  
BRAGEN: Here, you two, help carry the Examiner.  
(The guards lift the Doctor between them.)  
BRAGEN: I suppose you Earth people can't wait to examine Lesterson's space
capsule?  
BEN: Ay?  
(Ben is startled as the Doctor winks slyly at him.)

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

(Lesterson is polishing an oddly shaped piece of metal. A huge space capsule
dominates one side of the room. Lesterson's assistant, Janley, joins him.)  
JANLEY: (a woman) Lesterson.  
LESTERSON: Look at this.  
JANLEY: They've just brought in an Examiner from Earth, and a couple of
assistants.  
LESTERSON: An Examiner? What's he here for?  
JANLEY: I thought you'd know.  
LESTERSON: It's the capsule, it must be. Well, they can't stop me working on
it, I'll tell you that.  
JANLEY: Could anyone?  
LESTERSON: The Governor's always been difficult about it. But surely they
wouldn't send somebody all the way from Earth just  
JANLEY: Look, what about the meeting?  
LESTERSON: Meeting?  
JANLEY: Yes. I've arranged everything. Can we still use the old rocket room?  
LESTERSON: Yes, I suppose so. But I do wish you wouldn't get mixed up with
these pressure groups, Janley.  
JANLEY: Well, somebody has to do something. The colony's running down and you
know it.  
LESTERSON: I'm too busy.  
JANLEY: But if we ran things, you'd have better facilities, more money. I wish
you'd take an interest.  
LESTERSON: Now look, I don't mind letting you have the use of one of my rooms
now and again, Janley, but don't try to involve me. This is what I find
important. Two hundred years in a mercury swamp and this piece of metal that
dropped from it? Look, a couple of minutes polishing and it's as good as new.  
JANLEY: Wonderful.  
LESTERSON: Rain, damp, heat, mercury. Nothing touches this metal. No
corrosion, Janley. Think of that.  
JANLEY: Well, I hope the Examiner lets you go on with your experiment.
Frankly, I doubt it. I think the Governor's brought the Examiner here to stop
you opening the capsule. You should join our group, Lesterson. You might need
us one day.

**[Guest quarters]**

(Fully recovered, the Doctor, Ben and Polly have been left to make themselves
comfortable. The Doctor is plays on his recorder.)  
BEN: So the murdered man was the real Examiner?  
(Nodding, the Doctor blows a pair of notes.)  
BEN: Well, did you see who did it?  
(Top note screech.)  
POLLY: The Doctor got this button though.  
BEN: I think it's pretty dull around here. I don't know why we don't just go
back to the Tardis.  
POLLY: Doctor, are you going to let them think you're the real Examiner?  
(Two notes repeated.)  
POLLY: Won't that be dangerous?  
(Two notes again.)  
BEN: Look, why don't you stop blowing that thing and talk to us properly?  
POLLY: Ben!  
BEN: Now don't you start. It's bad enough with him.  
POLLY: Well, he hasn't done anything.  
BEN: No, that's just the trouble.  
(Ben snatches the recorder away.)  
BEN: He knows what happened back at the Tardis, yet will he tell us? Will he
come out and say? Will he admit to being the Doctor?  
(Ben blows angrily into the recorder. There is a knock on the door.)  
BEN: Come in!  
(Two guards in peaked caps and dark uniforms enter, with Bragen and a large
bearded man in his late fifties.)  
HENSELL: I am Hensell, the Governor. I trust you're all feeling much better?  
BEN: I've felt worse, Governor. The Governor.  
HENSELL: If Earth had seen fit to warn us you were coming, we might possibly
have been able to guide you down to the landing area.  
DOCTOR: If Earth didn't warn you we were coming, Governor, they must have had
a very good reason. I wonder what it was?  
HENSELL: Now look here, I run this Colony. I'm entitled to know why you have
come to Vulcan. What is your brief?  
DOCTOR: I am the Examiner.  
HENSELL: Why are you here?  
DOCTOR: To examine. And I intend to start my examination at once.  
(The Doctor darts forward and begins to examine Bragen's tunic.)  
HENSELL: Someone's leaked reports about these Rebel groups. That's it, isn't
it?  
DOCTOR: Your turn now, Governor.  
(The Doctor turns his attention to Hensell's clothing.)  
BRAGEN: There is Lesterson's capsule.  
HENSELL: Internal affairs are my business, Bragen. Please don't interfere.  
DOCTOR: Please go on.  
HENSELL: The capsule. It was found in a mercury swamp. It must have been here
for centuries.  
DOCTOR: Interesting. Continue.  
HENSELL: For centuries before the Earth colony arrived. I felt it might be
dangerous. It might contain bacteria.  
DOCTOR: I shall examine the capsule later. You may leave us.  
HENSELL: I shall look forward to your report. Bragen, see that the Examiner
and his party get some proper clothes, will you?  
(Hensell, Bragen, and the guards leave.)  
DOCTOR: We are wearing proper clothes.  
(The Doctor starts playing again.)  
BEN: Oh, how did he get that thing back again. That was a bit of a cheek,
wasn't it, seeing if the Governor was the guy you got the button off?  
POLLY: Doctor? When he was talking to you, you were staring at the other man.  
DOCTOR: Yes, very rude of me, wasn't it. Terrible manners. To tell you the
truth, I was studying his reaction, seeing if he agreed with the story.  
BEN: Did he?  
DOCTOR: Must have a look at that capsule.  
BEN: Now, you want to watch you don't take this Examiner stuff a bit too far.  
DOCTOR: Our answers must come from that mercury swamp.  
BEN: 'Cause at least one bloke ain't going to be fooled.  
DOCTOR: When Bragen found us, he definitely said space capsule.  
BEN: Look, you're not going to fool the guy that did the real Examiner in!

**[Corridor]**

(A little later Bragen, accompanied by a guard, is posting a notice on a
board. Quinn approaches.)  
QUINN: Bragen! What's all this nonsense about having to have a pass to see the
Examiner?  
BRAGEN: It's the Governor's idea.  
QUINN: Surely it doesn't apply to me?  
BRAGEN: It's not my order, Quinn. I expect the Governor wants to keep people
away from him.  
QUINN: It sounded like one of your red-tape ideas.  
BRAGEN: It had nothing to do with me.  
QUINN: Right!  
(Quinn strides away, practically colliding with Janley.)  
JANLEY: Oh!  
QUINN: Sorry, Janley.  
JANLEY: My fault.  
QUINN: Are you all right?  
JANLEY: Yes. Lesterson's just cleared me out of his lab. Is the Examiner going
to let him open the capsule?  
QUINN: I don't know. I'm on my way there now, if I can push past Bragen's army
of lay-abouts.

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

(Later that evening, the Doctor takes Ben and Polly to see the space capsule.
The Doctor spots the piece of metal that Lesterson was polishing earlier. He
picks it up and examines it, worriedly.)  
DOCTOR: Where did you get this?  
LESTERSON: It dropped from the capsule.  
DOCTOR: Dropped?  
LESTERSON: Yes, when it was being hauled into the laboratory. But, you can
see, this metal could revolutionise space travel. That's why I'm insisting
that we open it. Well, who knows what other marvels there may be inside?  
HENSELL: But Lesterson, I didn't think you could open it.  
LESTERSON: Well, I have a theory. I'm convinced that the opening mechanism on
the other side is either here, or here.  
(While Lesterson is occupied, the Doctor pulls out the piece of metal he found
in the Tardis and compares the two. They are identical.)  
DOCTOR: Extermination.  
LESTERSON: Now, my theory is that I can insert a laser ray in this ridge here.
The ray spreads, fuses the opening device and gets us in.  
HENSELL: Examiner, I shall have to make it your responsibility.  
DOCTOR: A laser. Why not? It shouldn't be too difficult.  
(The laser fires at the first spot. Nothing happens.)  
LESTERSON: Well, we'll try the other side.  
(Lesterson refocuses the laser. A mechanism engages and the hatchway slides
open. The Doctor and Lesterson step into the capsule.

**[Capsule entry]**

(A small brightly lit chamber. The Doctor studies the far wall. Everyone else
crowds in.)  
LESTERSON: Hmm. It's a bit disappointing.  
DOCTOR: Not really. This is just an entry bay, isn't it.  
LESTERSON: Yes, I suppose so.  
HENSELL: Well, this doesn't get us very far, does it?  
LESTERSON: Getting into the rest of the capsule will take time, Governor.  
BEN: Well, can't you use that torch thing again? That must be an opening door.  
LESTERSON: I should have to measure it up and find out where the lock
mechanism is.  
DOCTOR: I think we'll leave if for tonight.  
HENSELL: Leave it for tonight? But what did we come here for?  
DOCTOR: That is my decision, Governor.  
HENSELL: But good heavens above, man.  
DOCTOR: A hundred years you say this has been buried?  
LESTERSON: Oh, at least. Now, there must be something in the inner
compartment. We shall be able to find out where it came from originally.  
DOCTOR: It didn't come from this planet Vulcan.  
LESTERSON: Oh no, no, no. The metal is quite alien.  
DOCTOR: Alien, yes. Very alien. Goodnight.  
(The Doctor leaves the laboratory.)  
BEN: What's he up to now?  
POLLY: Ben, we're not going to let him out of our sight.  
(Ben and Polly follow the Doctor from the lab.)

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

HENSELL: Well, Lesterson, you got your way. Was it worth sending for this
Examiner? This idiotic Examiner?  
LESTERSON: I didn't send for him. I thought you did.  
QUINN: Why don't you let me talk to the Examiner, Hensell. I can find out
what's he's here for.  
HENSELL: No, no, no, no. You keep away from him. We'll leave him to work with
Lesterson here. We've all got enough to do without having to worry about some
amateur critic from Earth interfering.  
QUINN: But with five minutes  
HENSELL: You heard what I said, Quinn. You won't mind keeping the Examiner
busy, Lesterson? I don't mind what you do with him so long as you keep his
nose out of our business.  
LESTERSON: Yes. All right.  
HENSELL: All right. Well, we shall talk about it tomorrow.  
(Once he's alone, Lesterson returns to his workbench where he quickly realises
that his metal sample has disappeared.)

**[Guest quarters]**

(Later that night.)  
POLLY: Ben!  
BEN: (waking) What?  
POLLY: Shh! He's in the corridor.  
BEN: Who is?  
POLLY: The Doctor, you clod. Come on, quick!

**[Corridor]**

POLLY: He's going towards Lesterson's lab.  
BEN: Of course. To the space capsule.  
POLLY: Come on.

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

(The Doctor steps into the deserted laboratory, which is eerily illuminated by
the light glowing from the interior of the capsule. At the capsule entrance,
he dips into his pockets and takes out the two pieces of metal. Ben and Polly
appear in the doorway of the lab just in time to see the Doctor disappear into
the capsule.)

**[Capsule entrance]**

(The Doctor crosses to the far wall and inserts one of the pieces of metal
into a narrow opening. An inner door slides open, revealing a second
compartment. The Doctor edges forward, peering into the gloom. Two shapes are
silhouetted against the dull metal glow. Familiar, giant pepperpot shapes.)  
DOCTOR: Polly, Ben, come in and meet the Daleks.  
BEN: What?  
DOCTOR: The Daleks.  
(As Polly approaches, a sucker arm drops.)  
POLLY: You could have opened this before.  
DOCTOR: These two pieces of metal are identical. The Doctor got one of them
from the Daleks himself.  
BEN: Why do you keep saying the Doctor if you mean you?  
DOCTOR: I knew I should find them here. I knew it.  
BEN: Ah, they look harmless. Not very lively.  
POLLY: What do you think? Two hundred years in a swamp and you wouldn't look
very lively either. Nothing could live through that, could it?  
BEN: Live?  
DOCTOR: Nothing human, no.  
POLLY: Doctor, look.  
BEN: What's the matter?  
(The Doctor kneels to examine the marks on the dusty floor.)  
DOCTOR: There were three Daleks in here! What's happened to the other one?  
(Ben catches sight of something moving in the corner behind the Doctor.)  
BEN: Doctor!  
(Polly screams. The Doctor spins around. A clawed mutant scuttles from the
shadows across the floor.)

__**Episode Two**__

**[Capsule]**

DOCTOR: A light. A torch, outside.  
BEN: Did you see it?  
DOCTOR: Quickly, Ben, quickly!  
POLLY: What was it?  
(Ben runs out into the laboratory to look for the torch. He soon finds a lamp
with a long lead and drags it back into the capsule, unaware that he's being
watched by Resno, one of Lesterson's assistants. The Doctor takes the lamp and
begins checking every corner of the compartment.)  
POLLY: Can you answer me?  
BEN: It was a sort of disembodied hand. A sort of claw. It was horrible.  
(The Doctor searches for a while but doesn't find anything.)  
DOCTOR: No. No, there's nothing.  
BEN: You were right. There were three Daleks.  
POLLY: Don't you know what it was? If there were three, who moved it?  
BEN: Don't ask me. Lesterson?  
POLLY: But he hadn't opened the capsule.  
BEN: No, he said he hadn't opened it. Lets get our facts straight.  
DOCTOR: Ah ha. Excellent! Good thinking, good thinking.

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

BEN: Well, does that mean you think he's been inside?  
DOCTOR: Perhaps he's been experimenting on the Daleks? Ah.  
POLLY: But, but they're things. I, I mean they're dead. They must be!  
DOCTOR: This light is dead. Now the watch.  
(The Doctor flicks the torch on and off.)  
BEN: Do you mean these things just need power?  
DOCTOR: Now, Lesterson's fanatic. The Governor's jealous of his own position.
What does that suggest to you? Don't know. Haven't thought about it. But all
is not well with this colony. Add to that one Dalek.  
BEN: Oh, blimey, you don't half make mountains, don't you? One Dalek?  
DOCTOR: Yes! All that is needed to wipe out this entire colony.

**[Guest quarters]**

QUINN: Examiner? Examiner?  
(Bragen enters.)  
QUINN: Bragen, don't you ever knock before you enter a room?  
BRAGEN: I'm sorry if I disturbed you. I was expecting to find the Examiner
here, not you, Quinn.  
QUINN: Well, he's not here. You'll probably want to start snooping under the
bed, so I'll leave you to it.  
BRAGEN: One moment.  
QUINN: Don't try your luck with me, Bragen.  
BRAGEN: On the contrary, I'm trying to avoid trouble. The Governor gave
express instructions that you were not to contact the Examiner. I find you
here. I'm sure you can offer some suitable explanation.  
QUINN: I can. But not to you.  
BRAGEN: Before you go. Oh!  
(Quinn shoves Bragen to the floor.)  
QUINN: Don't ever try to block my way again.  
BRAGEN: Guard!  
(As Quinn leaves a guard enters and helps Bragen to his feet.)  
BRAGEN: The Examiner is missing. He must be found immediately.

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

(The Doctor is examining the exterior of the capsule.)  
BEN: Of course, the real Doctor was always going on about the Daleks.  
POLLY: Real Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Real Doctor? Oh, you mean the real Doctor.  
BEN: Yeah, now I've seen that claw thing, well, wouldn't want to shake hands
with it, let's put it that way.  
POLLY: Doctor, look, if they're that dangerous, what are you going to do about
it?  
DOCTOR: Save my breath. Would Lesterson listen? Lesterson listen. Lesterson
listen, Lesterson listen. Exercises the tongue. Try it. Lesterson listen,
Lesterson listen, Lesterson listen.  
BEN: Look, they think you're the Examiner, order them to destroy the Daleks.
Well, chuck your weight about.  
POLLY: (in background) Lesterson listen, Lesterson listen, Lesterson listen,
Lesterson listen, Lesterson listen, Lesterson listen.  
POLLY + DOCTOR: Lesterson listen, Lesterson listen, Lesterson listen...  
(Behind them, Lesterson and Resno enter.)  
LESTERSON: What do you think you're doing in here?  
DOCTOR: Listen, listen.  
(The Doctor holds out the Examiner's badge.)  
LESTERSON: Who gave you permission?  
DOCTOR: Read this. Aloud!  
LESTERSON: Accord every access.  
DOCTOR: Exactly! It doesn't say 'except your laboratory' anywhere does it?
Unless it's in micro-print.  
LESTERSON: I should have been asked first.  
DOCTOR: What was the first thing you noticed when you looked inside that
capsule?  
BEN: Well, the Daleks.  
DOCTOR: You were astounded?  
POLLY: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Amazed?  
BEN: Yes.  
DOCTOR: You didn't even give them a glance! Why? Because you'd been in there
and seen them. Where is the third Dalek?  
LESTERSON: I don't know what you're talking about.  
DOCTOR: You opened up the capsule without permission. You found the inner
compartment containing three Daleks. You took one of them away and you hid it!  
LESTERSON: Hid it? What, what nonsense!  
BRAGEN: May I ask what all this is about?  
POLLY: We opened an inner compartment in the capsule, and Lesterson had
already been in there.  
LESTERSON: I don't deny that.  
BEN: And he's nicked a Dalek!  
BRAGEN: Dalek?  
LESTERSON: It's the name the Examiner has given to two metal creations that
I've discovered inside the capsule.  
BEN: And they're dangerous. Evil.  
LESTERSON: Lumps of metal. Quite inactive.  
BEN: That's what you think, mate. If you'd seen  
(The Doctor's recorder silences Ben.)  
LESTERSON: I consider it my duty as a scientist to examine and investigate
these objects. Now please, all of you, keep out of my laboratory. Keep your
hands off my experiments!  
DOCTOR: These lumps of metal, Daleks, I want them broken up, or melted down.
Up or down, I don't care which, but destroyed!  
LESTERSON: I refuse to allow it.  
DOCTOR: I'm an Earth Examiner. I demand it.  
LESTERSON: You're exceeding your authority.  
DOCTOR: Perhaps we should ask the Governor about that? I wish to see him
immediately.  
BRAGEN: That might be difficult.  
DOCTOR: But not impossible. Ben, Polly.  
(The Doctor, Ben, and Polly leave, followed by Bragen.)  
RESNO: Could he stop the experiments?  
LESTERSON: I don't know. It's none of your business. You go and get Janley and
then come back here. We haven't got any time to waste. Now go on, man.
Quickly, quickly.  
(Resno leaves. Lesterson goes to the capsule and opens a hidden compartment,
revealing the third Dalek.)  
LESTERSON: They won't stop me experimenting. There must be some way to bring
you back to life, and I'm going to find it.

**[Guest quarters]**

BRAGEN: And of course you do have the right of any access.  
DOCTOR: Which is why I have a badge which says so.  
BRAGEN: Lesterson watches over his ideas like a mother hen.  
DOCTOR: If there was a bomb under this floor timed to go off in five minutes,
would you ask my permission before you ripped up the floorboards? Ah ha,
fruit!  
POLLY: Thank you.  
BRAGEN: Examiner, it's up to you of course, but I'd advise a little discretion
in your investigations. It's not a very good time, just now.  
(The Doctor is generously distributing fruit from a bowl by the bedside.)  
BRAGEN: Thank you. With all these disturbances  
POLLY: Disturbances?  
BRAGEN: Yes, minor acts of sabotage. Rebel cliques, secret newspapers, nothing
important you understand, but it keeps the Governor busy. I've no doubt he'll
tell you about it himself when I arrange your meeting with him.  
BEN: When will that be?  
BRAGEN: Oh, he's going on a tour of the perimeter of the colony. I'll find out
if he can see you before he goes.  
POLLY: Thank you.  
(Bragen leaves. Polly sits next to Ben on the bed.)  
BEN: You know, it's little things like this that make it difficult to believe
that you're the Doctor. The other one, I mean. The proper one. Oh, nuts, you
know what I mean.  
DOCTOR: Nuts? Yes, certainly, here we are. Crackers?  
BEN: You, my old china, are an out and out phony!  
DOCTOR: China. Yes, I went there once I believe. Met Marco Polo.  
BEN: No, not China. China! China and plate, mate, friend.  
DOCTOR: Yes, Marco Polo, a friend. I believe he was.  
POLLY: Don't listen to him, Doctor. I know who you are.  
DOCTOR: Shh!  
(The Doctor gestures Polly into silence as he listens closely to a piece of
fruit he's chosen from the bowl. Gently placing the fruit on the table, he
pulls a pen knife from his pocket and carefully slices the fruit in half.)  
POLLY: It's a  
(Concealed in the middle of the fruit is a tiny listening device. Indicating
that Ben and Polly should remain silent, the Doctor extracts the device, drops
it to the floor and stamps down hard, crushing it.)  
BEN: Well, well, a touch of the bugs. Microphones.  
POLLY: Someone's been listening to what we were saying!  
BEN: Yes, so that's why you were messing about and talking nonsense.  
DOCTOR: I never talk nonsense.  
POLLY: Ahem.  
DOCTOR: Well, hardly never.  
BEN: Well, they certainly believe in making us at home, don't they?  
DOCTOR: At first, I thought there might be more than one.  
BEN: Here, I bet old Charlie Bragen did it.  
POLLY: Charlie?  
BEN: Well Fred wouldn't suit him, would it.  
POLLY: If he did do it, do you think it was his own idea? I mean, he could
have been under orders.  
BEN: You mean from the Governor? Ah, I don't know. What do you think, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Oh, yes. Yes of course. Let's consider this button for a moment. It's
the only clue we've got to the murderer of the Examiner. The real Examiner.  
POLLY: And who asked for him to come?  
BEN: Well, Lesterson's crackers about that capsule. He wouldn't want anyone
nosing about.  
POLLY: Bragen said the Governor's been having trouble.  
BEN: No, rule him out. Governors are all the same. He wouldn't ask for help.
If he sent the word it would look as if he couldn't do the job properly.  
POLLY: Yes.  
BEN: Oh, well, I vote we go back to the Tardis. I've had enough of this dump.  
DOCTOR: Have you? What about the Daleks?  
BEN: Well, they're dead.  
POLLY: Well, what about that thing we saw in the capsule? That was alive all
right.  
BEN: Yeah, I can't explain that.  
DOCTOR: I can. And that's why we have to stay.

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

RESNO: Ugly-looking brutes, aren't they?  
(Janley and Resno are wiring up the Dalek for testing.)  
RESNO: What's he want to muck about with them for? Leave well alone, that's
what I say.  
JANLEY: You're a fine one to be a research assistant. Leave well alone.
There'll be no progress on this planet with people like you around.  
RESNO: We're doing all right as we are. Or we were until your lot came along
stirring things up. You won't get away with it, you know. The Governor knows
all about you rebels. He'll smash the lot of you when he's ready.  
JANLEY: Governor?  
RESNO: Yeah, the Governor!  
JANLEY: He couldn't smash  
LESTERSON: Will you be quiet! Where do you both think you are? This is a
scientific laboratory. Kindly keep your politics out of it. Come on, Resno,
man, get on with it. We haven't got all day. We've got to get this working
before the Examiner stops us. He's got some phobia about these, these Daleks.

**[Guest quarters]**

(The Doctor is sitting on the bed clutching his diary.)  
DOCTOR: I know the misery they cause, the destruction. But there's something
else more terrible. Something I can only half remember.  
POLLY: Doctor, what was it?  
(A knock at the door. Bragen enters.)  
DOCTOR: Well? Where is the Governor? What did he say?  
BRAGEN: He sends his apologies, Examiner. He can't see you tonight, but he
hopes to see you first thing in the morning.  
BEN: Well, it might not wait that long, Char, ah, Bragen.  
BRAGEN: It will have to.  
DOCTOR: Excuse me.  
BEN: Where are you going?  
DOCTOR: To see the Governor, of course.  
BRAGEN: I'm afraid that's not possible. Once his door is closed, no one, not
even you, Examiner, is allowed into his room.  
DOCTOR: Very well.  
BRAGEN: Thank you. Until the morning then.  
(Bragen leaves.)  
BEN: What happens now?  
DOCTOR: I shall radio Earth. Governor or not, Hensell will have to listen to
them. I'll get Earth to back me.  
(Suddenly the Doctor yanks open the door. The corridor is empty.)  
DOCTOR: That's funny. I could have sworn. You stay here. I shan't be long.  
(As he leaves, Ben and Polly see the Doctor slip the door knob into his
pocket. They laugh.)

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

LESTERSON: Connecting now.  
RESNO: All connections responding.  
LESTERSON: Nothing at all?  
RESNO: No.  
LESTERSON: Are you sure?  
RESNO: There's nothing wrong here.  
LESTERSON: Well, let's see.  
RESNO: Really, if you can't trust me to read a dial.  
LESTERSON: Be quiet. All right, we'll try again. This time we'll take it up to
3.24. Got that, Janley?  
JANLEY: 3.24.  
(Very slowly, the Dalek's sucker arm begins to rise.)  
RESNO: It's moving.  
LESTERSON: Now, note this, Janley. Number one attachment with sucker stick
responding. Number two attachment not moving. Number three attachment with
lens responding. Watch these meters, Resno.  
RESNO: Still responding.  
LESTERSON: Now, it's reasonable to assume that this the sucker stick acts like
some kind of a hand.  
(Janley screams.)  
LESTERSON: It's all right. Don't be alarmed. We've only introduced temporary
power. We shall have to be able to open it up before we could find how it
works permanently.  
JANLEY: It's a bit frightening.  
LESTERSON: Yes. Now, I cannot think what this short stubby arm is for.  
JANLEY: Could the lens attachment be an eye?  
LESTERSON: Yes, yes, yes, yes. Now it's quite possible that this, Dalek, now
there must be some kind of directing influence. There may even be a simplified
brain. Positronic, I shouldn't wonder. Oh, if only we could open it up.  
(The sucker arm drops suddenly.)  
LESTERSON: Now what?  
RESNO: Everything functioning here.  
LESTERSON: Yes. Well, perhaps the power is leaking away somewhere. We'll try
again.  
(Janley increases the power supply to the Dalek. The Dale's eye-stick rises
slowly.)  
RESNO: Look at the eye-stick! It's watching us!  
LESTERSON: Don't be absurd.  
RESNO: It was, I tell you. I saw it.  
LESTERSON: You can't use the phrase 'watching us'. You'll have us believing
that the thing has intelligence next. Now, get on with your work, man.

**[Communications room]**

(The Doctor finds the door ajar and the room in semi-darkness. The place is a
mess. The equipment has been sabotaged and the control panel smashed. The body
of the radio operator lies on the floor, unconscious. The Doctor checks he is
alive and hears movement across the room.)  
DOCTOR: I know you're there.  
(Quinn steps from the shadows.)  
QUINN: Examiner, thank goodness it's you. I've been trying to talk to you ever
since you got here.  
(Bragen enters.)  
BRAGEN: What's happening here? You again.  
QUINN: What do you want?  
DOCTOR: I found the operator unconscious.  
QUINN: Yes, so did I. I was just looking at him when I heard someone move. It
must have been you.  
BRAGEN: And those?  
(Quinn is holding a set of wire cutters.)  
QUINN: I picked them up. What is all this?  
DOCTOR: The cables have been cut.  
QUINN: What? This is serious. It's not just our own communications. We're cut
off from Earth as well.  
BRAGEN: The only people that would want to do that are the rebels.  
QUINN: If those muscle boys of yours had any brains, they'd stop things like
this.  
DOCTOR: Bragen, I was attacked just after I landed. This is a small souvenir I
collected.  
BRAGEN: This button belongs to you, doesn't it?  
QUINN: Well, yes.  
BRAGEN: And you say you picked these up? I suggest that you were sabotaging
the communications.  
QUINN: That's a lie.  
BRAGEN: Having first attacked one of the engineers. I'd detain the Governor on
evidence like that.  
QUINN: I hope you're not thinking of detaining me, Bragen.  
BRAGEN: I've no option. I could hardly let you run around loose after this,
could I? All right, guards.  
QUINN: I warn you, Bragen!  
(As the guards close around him, Quinn relaxes.)  
QUINN: All right, you win this round, Bragen. We'll see what it looks like in
front of the Governor.  
BRAGEN: The Governor will want an enquiry. May I ask what you were doing here?

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

(Resno has set up a camera on a tripod in front of the Dalek.)  
LESTERSON: Right. I've redirected power. This time working up to 4.68. Now,
Resno, you will have to dodge between the camera and your meters.  
RESNO: Ready.  
LESTERSON: Connecting now.  
RESNO: All connections responding.  
LESTERSON: Excellent.  
JANLEY: It's working!  
LESTERSON: Excellent. Film it, film it now, Resno. And note the readings,
Janley.  
(The Dalek's eye-stick spins around and fixes on Resno.)  
LESTERSON: It seems to be interested in you, Resno. What's the matter with
you, man?  
RESNO: I tell you it's intelligent. It's watching me, Lesterson, weighing me
up. I can sense it.  
LESTERSON: Don't be a fool.  
RESNO: I don't like it, I tell you. I don't know what these things can do.  
LESTERSON: No, and we never shall know, shall we, unless we take film of every
reaction. Now get on with your work, man.  
(Reluctantly, Resno returns to the camera. Suddenly, the Dalek's gun-stick
emits a blast of negative light. Resno crumples to the floor, the camera
crashing down on top of him.)  
LESTERSON: Resno!  
(Lesterson disconnects the power.)  
JANLEY: It's all right, he isn't dead.  
LESTERSON: What happened?  
JANLEY: Knocked out by the shock wave.  
LESTERSON: We must get him to the hospital. I'll go and get help.  
(Lesterson leaves. Janley kneels by Resno then reaches for a dust sheet and
starts to wrap the body.)

**[Guest quarters]**

(The next morning, the Doctor stands at the window, deep in thought. He starts
playing his recorder.)  
POLLY: But we've got to defend Quinn.  
BEN: Yeah, I know. He's innocent until he's proved guilty. But he is guilty.  
POLLY: He's the Deputy Governor.  
BEN: So what? I had a headmaster once who got nicked for not paying his bus
fare. And then there's the motive. Don't forget the motive.  
POLLY: Like what, for instance?  
BEN: Well, he's the Deputy Governor, right? Maybe he wants to be Governor.  
POLLY: Oh, that's ridiculous.  
BEN: Well, the jacket button wasn't. And he was caught red-handed in the
Communications room with a pair of pliers. And don't tell me he was plucking
his eye-brows either.  
POLLY: Look, there are some people you know are all right. You just know by
looking at them.  
BRAGEN: Good morning. The enquiry is about to begin. I've been sent to escort
you.

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

(Lesterson is preparing the Dalek for a demonstration.)  
LESTERSON: Hello, Janley.  
JANLEY: Is it time?  
LESTERSON: Yes, yes, I think so. I feel quite excited.  
JANLEY: So you should. It's a wonderful achievement.  
LESTERSON: Yes, yes, but the wonderful thing, Janley, is that we don't know
the full scope of this experiment. Who knows where we may go from here. Who
know what this Dalek may do?  
JANLEY: It's harmless now?  
LESTERSON: Yes, yes, yes. I've removed. Oh, Resno. Have you been to see him
today?  
JANLEY: Yes, yes.  
LESTERSON: And?  
JANLEY: He's had medical attention. He's going to be all right.  
LESTERSON: Oh good.  
JANLEY: No one must find out about this accident. It might give the Examiner
just the excuse they want, and he could stop the whole project.  
LESTERSON: Oh yes. Yes, yes, yes, you're right.  
JANLEY: Well. Ready?  
LESTERSON: Yes. Let's go and surprise them.

**[Governor's office]**

(The Doctor, Ben and Polly are shown in.)  
HENSELL: I am sorry I couldn't see you earlier, Examiner. Please sit down.  
(Quinn is escorted in under guard.)  
HENSELL: Well, Quinn, I don't like this any more than you do. What have you
been up to?  
QUINN: Nothing. Absolutely nothing.  
HENSELL: Well, what about Bragen's report then? These are facts, Quinn. Now,
what have you got to say about it?  
QUINN: Does the engineer say I hit him?  
BRAGEN: How could he if he was hit from behind?  
QUINN: Then its only circumstantial evidence.  
BRAGEN: The Examiner was also attacked in the mercury swamp. We have a button
from your jacket found in the Examiner's hand.  
QUINN: I can't explain that.  
BRAGEN: I'm sure you can't.  
HENSELL: Examiner. You seem to be in two minds.  
BEN: (sotto) Yeah, and two bodies.  
HENSELL: You mentioned to Bragen that these machines of Lesterson's. What do
you call them?  
DOCTOR: I call them what they are, Daleks.  
HENSELL: Yes, yes, yes, Daleks. You say they could be a motive for destroying
our communications.  
DOCTOR: I do.  
(Lesterson enters.)  
HENSELL: Lesterson, this is a special enquiry. Now please.  
LESTERSON: This won't wait. You won't be disappointed.  
HENSELL: You heard what I said, Lesterson.  
LESTERSON: Governor, I've just completed an experiment which could
revolutionise the whole colony. Bear with me.  
DOCTOR: Lesterson, what have you done? What have you done?  
LESTERSON: I'll show you. Janley, now!  
(Lesterson's Dalek glides into the room. It's movement is strangely
fascinating, holding everyone transfixed. Everyone except the Doctor who edges
backwards, shaking his head in horror. The Dalek stops and looks around at
each person in turn. At last it re-focuses on the Doctor. The Doctor backs
into a chair.)  
BEN: It recognised the Doctor. It recognised him.  
POLLY: What's the matter, Doctor? Are you all right?  
DOCTOR: The fools. The stupid fools.  
BEN: You're scared. What can it do?  
DOCTOR: Nothing yet.  
LESTERSON: This creation is called, I understand, a Dalek.  
BEN: It knew who you were. It sounds ridiculous, but it did.  
DOCTOR: It knew who I was.  
BEN: The Dalek knows who you are.  
LESTERSON: Now, look at it. I have merely given it electrical power, but it is
capable of storing it. Moreover, it responds to orders. Turn around.  
(The Dalek obeys.)  
LESTERSON: Move that chair.  
(The Dalek pushes the chair across the room.)  
LESTERSON: Stop. You see? Well, just think what this could do for our mining
program, our processing, packaging. Dozens of labour jobs, Governor. It may
even supply the end to all this Colony's problems.  
DOCTOR: Yes, it will end the colony's problems, because it will end the
colony.  
DALEK: I am your servant.  
LESTERSON: It, it spoke! Janley, did you hear it? It can actually talk.  
DOCTOR: It can do many things, Lesterson. But the thing it does most
efficiently is exterminate human beings. It destroys them, without mercy,
without conscience. It destroys them. Utterly. Completely. It destroys them.  
DALEK: (trying to drown out the Doctor) I am your servant. I am your servant.
I am your servant. I am your servant. I am your servant.

__**Episode Three**__

**[Governor's office]**

HENSELL: So, Lesterson, they're even capable of speech.  
LESTERSON: Yes. But then, why not? After all, they have a certain
intelligence.  
HENSELL: Yes, I know, but  
LESTERSON: But it is an intelligence that we can control.  
HENSELL: So what you want is permission to continue your experiments?  
LESTERSON: Governor, think what it would mean if we were to set it to work in
the mines. It could double our production overnight.  
BRAGEN: Consider the effects it could have on our whole economy.  
HENSELL: Yes, and the effect of that on Earth. Yes, yes, they could be very
grateful.  
DOCTOR: (to Dalek) I shall stop you. I will.  
HENSELL: All right, Lesterson, permission granted.  
DOCTOR: Permission? Permission for what?  
LESTERSON: To continue my work, Examiner.  
DOCTOR: But, but didn't you all hear what I said? The Daleks must be
destroyed!  
LESTERSON: Never!  
DOCTOR: Very well. If not by my order, then by Earth's! Come Ben, Polly.  
HENSELL: Ah, Examiner, just a moment. Tell me, why are you so against this
project?  
DOCTOR: But I've told you! I realise I can't give you any proof, but you've no
idea of the danger.  
LESTERSON: No.  
DOCTOR: Yes. Danger! I shall be contacting Earth just as soon as radio
communications have been restored.  
(The Doctor glares at the Dalek.)  
DOCTOR: You're my servant, are you?  
DALEK: I am.  
DOCTOR: Very well. Immobilise yourself. Go on. I order it! Immediately!  
(The Dalek's eye-stalk droops.)  
DOCTOR: Huh!  
(The Doctor leaves with Ben and Polly. The Dalek comes back to life.)  
JANLEY: Lesterson.  
LESTERSON: Why did you stop obeying? You were given an order.  
DALEK: He has gone.  
LESTERSON: Then you obey only  
DALEK: His order was wrong. I cannot serve human beings if I am immobilised.
You gave me power. Your orders are right. I serve you.  
HENSELL: Lesterson. Lesterson, it reasons. Just how limited is its
intelligence?  
LESTERSON: Now, there is no cause for concern, Governor. Just you wait until
you see the amount of work it can do. And now, I'm really going to put you
through your paces. Follow me, Dalek.  
DALEK: I obey.  
(The Dalek follows Lesterson and Janley.)

**[Corridor]**

DOCTOR: That's it!  
POLLY: We should have stayed with Quinn.  
BEN: Well, we couldn't have helped him, Polly, even if we'd wanted to. The
Governor's already reached his verdict.  
DOCTOR: Wire. Scissors. Tape.  
POLLY: But he didn't murder the real Examiner. I'm sure he didn't.  
BEN: Oh, well. The way I see it this lot's too busy arguing amongst themselves
to do much about anything. Anyway, first things first. The Daleks are the
important thing.  
DOCTOR: Ah! Congratulations, Ben!  
BEN: What did I do? What did I do?  
DOCTOR: You just used your brains, that's what you did. The Daleks are the
most important thing.  
POLLY: I still think Quinn's innocent.

**[Governor's office]**

QUINN: How can I be in league with the rebels?  
BRAGEN: The evidence confirms it.  
QUINN: It was I that warned of their dangers.  
BRAGEN: As part of your overall plan.  
QUINN: You wouldn't even take the matter seriously.  
BRAGEN: If I was wrong then, I have a chance to rectify it now.  
QUINN: If that's going to be your attitude, I suggest that we  
HENSELL: Quinn! Let us conduct this inquiry in an orderly manner. Now, the
Examiner was attacked. There can be no question of that.  
BRAGEN: And the button grabbed by the Examiner was missing from your suit.  
HENSELL: Yes, if you've got anything to add to that, you'd better say it now.  
QUINN: I didn't attack the man. I had no reason to. I was the one that sent
for him.  
HENSELL: You sent for him?  
QUINN: It was necessary. Under the circumstances, I'd hardly be likely to
sabotage the radio communications.  
HENSELL: But, but why Quinn? Why?  
QUINN: Because of the rebels!  
BRAGEN: The rebels. They're nothing more than one or two fanatics.  
QUINN: You know as well as I do that they  
BRAGEN: Unless you're trying to create trouble here to undermine the
Governor's position.  
HENSELL: Bragen, you'd better explain that.  
BRAGEN: If you're removed, who takes your place? The Deputy Governor, of
course. And that's the real reason behind all this trouble, isn't it, Quinn?  
HENSELL: Go on.  
BRAGEN: You attack the Examiner in the mercury swamp and blame it on the
rebels. Then you sabotage the radio and blame that on the rebels too.  
HENSELL: Get him out of my sight!  
QUINN: Hensell, before you listen to these preposterous allegations  
(The guards drag Quinn out.)  
HENSELL: I chose Quinn myself. I trained him for the job. Why, in a few years
time, he'd have had this seat.  
BRAGEN: Sometimes, Governor, a few years is a long time to wait.  
HENSELL: Oh, Bragen?  
BRAGEN: Governor?  
HENSELL: You will assume Quinn's duties. As of now, you are Deputy Governor.

**[Guest quarters]**

(The Doctor uses a chair to smash the outer casing of a small electrical unit
he's appropriated.)  
BEN: I hope you know what you're doing.  
DOCTOR: So do I. Excellent. excellent.  
BEN: I thought we were after the Daleks, not this control unit you've nicked.  
DOCTOR: If only we could find a. Ah, yes.  
(Crossing to the bed, the Doctor pulls the mattress from the frame.)  
BEN: He's a right little delinquent, isn't he?  
POLLY: Doctor, what on Earth are you up to?  
(The Doctor tugs at one of the metal cross straps on the bed frame until it
comes loose.)  
DOCTOR: Now we're really getting somewhere!  
BEN: Look Doctor, I don't want to appear dim, but how's this going to do the
Daleks in?  
DOCTOR: They think that Lesterson's the driving force, but I don't. The Daleks
are using him.  
POLLY: But how?  
DOCTOR: Problem. Smash the Daleks, and the people here will lock us up or kill
us. Let the Daleks go, and we'll all be exterminated.  
BEN: We could just go back to the Tardis. At least we'd be safe to think
there.  
DOCTOR: Oh yes, it's coming on.  
BEN: Oh, you talk to him, will you?  
POLLY: Doctor, look, if you told us what you were up to, perhaps we could help
you.  
DOCTOR: Mustn't underestimate any of them. Lesterson's a first class
scientist, first class. He opened the capsule. He realised that the Daleks
could be reactivated.  
BEN: Yeah, that could be the answer. Let's kidnap Lesterson, and hide him away
for a bit. Well, it would stop him bringing the Daleks back to life, wouldn't
it? I thought it was pretty bright.  
DOCTOR: There we are.  
(The Doctor holds up the collection of parts he has assembled.)  
BEN: What is it?  
DOCTOR: What is it? It could be the answer to all our problems.

**[Corridor]**

(The Doctor, Ben and Polly see Quinn being escorted by a guard.)  
QUINN: Ah, Examiner, don't let them fool you about the rebels. They're strong.
Try and find out where they hold their meetings.  
POLLY: Leave him alone!  
QUINN: It's all right, Polly.  
DOCTOR: We'll help him Polly, but later.  
POLLY: Yes, but  
DOCTOR: Now, this is a case where a little injustice is better than wholesale
slaughter. What we want is in Lesterson's laboratory. Come along.

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

LESTERSON: Incredible! Let's move on to test fourteen.  
DALEK: I am ready.  
LESTERSON: When sodium acts on ethyl alcohol, what is the resulting
derivative?  
DALEK: Sodium ethoxide. C2 H5 ONA.  
LESTERSON: Just five seconds, Janley. Just the time it took to speak the
answer.  
JANLEY: It's right too.  
LESTERSON: But of course it's right. Look, can you imagine what kind of
positronic brain this robot has, Janley? Think of the store of knowledge that
it must carry. Sulphuric acid.  
DALEK: H2 SO4.  
LESTERSON: Ah, you see?  
DOCTOR: May I come in?  
LESTERSON: What do you want?  
DOCTOR: Oh, just to see how you're getting on.  
LESTERSON: If you think  
DOCTOR: No, please. I'm not here to cause trouble. I'm just interested, that's
all.  
LESTERSON: You've done nothing but meddle and interfere ever since you landed
on Vulcan.  
DOCTOR: Well, I did give you permission to open up the capsule, now didn't I?
Oh please, carry on.  
LESTERSON: And you won't try to stop me?  
DOCTOR: Stop you? No, of course not. We got off on the wrong foot, Lesterson,
but I'm a reasonable man, and I've been thinking perhaps I was hasty.  
LESTERSON: Well, if you really want to call a truce.  
DOCTOR: A truce? My dear fellow, I'd like to be friends.  
LESTERSON: Yes. Yes, very well, you may stay.  
DOCTOR: Oh, thank you. Thank you.  
(The Doctor hustles Ben and Polly out of the lab.)  
DOCTOR: Perhaps you'd like to amuse yourselves for a little while.  
(On the other side of the room, Janley answers the communicator.)  
JANLEY: Laboratory. Yes. All right. I can come now. Right.  
(Janley picks up a cloth-wrapped bundle from the desk and conceals it behind
her back.)  
JANLEY: I just have to slip out for a few minutes, Lesterson, all right?  
LESTERSON: Ah, yes, yes. Very well then, Examiner, shall we test its knowledge
of physics?  
DOCTOR: Oh, splendid, splendid. Please, please, carry on.  
LESTERSON: Thank you. What is the First Law of Thermodynamics?  
DALEK: When heat is transformed into any other kind of energy or vice versa,
the total quantity of energy remains invariable.  
(As the Dalek gives the answer, the Doctor slips the modified control unit
from his pocket and connects it to the generator.)  
DALEK: That is to say, the quantity of heat which disappears is equivalent to
the quantity of other kind of energy produced.  
(The Doctor activates his device and the Dalek begins to spin helplessly, its
eye and sucker sticks twitching uncontrollably.)  
LESTERSON: You fool! What do you think you're doing?  
DOCTOR: I'm saving your life!  
(Lesterson smashes the control unit and pushes the Doctor towards the doors.)  
LESTERSON: Get out! Get out!  
DALEK: I have sustained no damage.  
(The Dalek swings round to watch the Doctor leave, the mechanism behind its
empty gun-socket clicking in useless frustration.)

**[Governor's office]**

JANLEY: It's all right. It's been done.  
BRAGEN: You were able to get away then?  
JANLEY: Yes. Lesterson's with the Examiner. And Hensell?  
BRAGEN: At a meeting of production managers. He left me in control.  
JANLEY: We could take over the colony now.  
BRAGEN: No. No, it has to be absolutely right. I don't want to take over a
colony full of rebels do I, Janley?  
JANLEY: I don't know. You're making me help them.  
BRAGEN: Only to stir them up to create enough trouble to get rid of Hensell,
and then, then we crush them. The whole colony will be grateful, and I'll be
Governor.  
(Janley unwraps the bundle.)  
BRAGEN: Is that the gun you told me of? Can you persuade the rebels this will
help them?  
JANLEY: Yes, Valmar thinks he can work in a switch to turn it on and off.  
BRAGEN: How powerful is it?  
JANLEY: It killed Resno, Lesterson's assistant. Lesterson believes that
Resno's simply shaken up, taking a few days off.  
BRAGEN: And the body?  
JANLEY: In the mercury swamp. Lesterson was the indirect cause of Resno's
death. It's a good hold over him if he makes trouble. I'll give this to Valmar
then?  
BRAGEN: Yes.  
JANLEY: When do we move?  
BRAGEN: I need another card in my hand. The Examiner bothers me.  
JANLEY: I thought Quinn was the danger.  
BRAGEN: Not any more. The Examiner's no fool. No, there has to be something
else.

**[Corridor]**

(A little later, Ben and Polly are searching for the Doctor.)  
POLLY: Well?  
BEN: Well, he's not in the laboratory. Lesterson's by himself.  
POLLY: Hmm. He must have gone another way. Can I leave it you? I'm going to go
back to the rest room.  
BEN: But  
POLLY: Somebody's got to clear it up.  
BEN: Okay.  
(Ben leaves. Janley appears.)  
JANLEY: Hello there.  
POLLY: Hello. You're Lesterson's assistant aren't you?  
JANLEY: Yes. You're not looking for the Examiner, are you?  
POLLY: Well, do you know where he is?  
JANLEY: Yes, he's waiting to get a message through from Earth. He's in the
Communications room.  
POLLY: Erm.  
JANLEY: Oh, you'll find it easy enough. Look. Around, then to your right, in
the next block.  
POLLY: Thanks very much.  
(Janley follows Polly at a short distance.)

**[Communications room]**

POLLY: Doctor? Anyone here?  
(A technician looms from the shadows and grabs Polly, putting his hand over
her mouth.)  
JANLEY: Well done, Valmar.  
(Janley breaks a phial into a handkerchief.)  
JANLEY: Hold her. Hold her.  
(With the handkerchief over her nose and mouth, Polly sags unconscious in
Valmar's arms.)  
JANLEY: There, that'll keep her quiet for a bit.  
VALMAR: I've no idea who she is. She was just snooping around.  
JANLEY: I sent her. We want her kept out of the way. Get a couple of your men
to keep her in a safe place. Now, this is what I told you about.  
VALMAR: Yes. The lethal power must come from here.  
JANLEY: Uh huh.  
VALMAR: It should have quite a good range.  
JANLEY: Can you fix it?  
VALMAR: It's easy. This could win us the revolution.

**[Guest quarters]**

(The Doctor is stretched out on the bed, playing his recorder.)  
BEN: She said she was coming back here. She knew the way, and she wouldn't
have wandered off. I know she wouldn't! Oh!  
DOCTOR: Ben, if you were a Dalek, what would be your next move?  
BEN: I'm talking about Polly.  
DOCTOR: Oh, no, no, no, no. She's a clever girl, but she couldn't answer this.  
BEN: But she is missing!  
DOCTOR: Oh, no, no, no.  
BEN: Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes!  
DOCTOR: No, no, no! She's looking around. There's a lot to see in the colony.
She's interested. I like that.  
BEN: Come on.  
DOCTOR: Where are we going?  
BEN: To report it. If we make a fool of ourselves, I don't care. We report it!

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

LESTERSON: Yes, yes, yes. I managed to stop that fool of an Examiner just in
time. You know, there are some people here who believe that you're an enemy.  
DALEK: I am your servant. What does this machine do?  
LESTERSON: You know, it's amazing. You have an almost human interest and
curiosity.  
DALEK: A Dalek is bet, is not the same as a human. If I am to help, I must
know everything.  
LESTERSON: Yes. Yes, of course.  
DALEK: What is this machine?  
LESTERSON: It computes meteorite storms as they approach our weather
satellites.  
DALEK: How accurate is it?  
LESTERSON: About seventy percent. It helps to cut down on our satellite
losses.  
DALEK: Daleks can build computers with one hundred percent accuracy.  
LESTERSON: One hundred percent?  
DALEK: If you provide materials and our own power unit, a computer will be
built.  
LESTERSON: A hundred percent? But that would be an enormous saving for the for
the colony.  
DALEK: Then you will get the materials?  
LESTERSON: I'll go and speak to the Governor at once.  
DALEK: I will be ready to dictate the blueprint when you return.  
LESTERSON: Oh, that's marvellous.  
(Lesterson leaves. The Dalek moves to the generator and adjusts a control. As
the power rises, the Dalek glides inside the capsule.)

**[Corridor]**

(Ben realises the Doctor is lagging behind.)  
BEN: You agreed we'd go and see Bragen.  
DOCTOR: Hmm? Power.  
BEN: Come on then!  
DOCTOR: Now the energy intake for Daleks should be the cube  
(The Doctor rips a notice from the notice board, and starts scribbling on the
back.)  
DOCTOR: Now then, twenty two over three. Nineteen times  
BEN: Well, now what are you at? Talk to yourself.  
DOCTOR: Oh, it's useless with incomplete data!  
(The Doctor smoothes the notice flat again and pins it back on the board. Then
he ducks out of sight.)  
DOCTOR: Lesterson!  
BEN: Eh?  
DOCTOR: He just went past. That means we can get into his laboratory again.  
BEN: But we're looking for  
DOCTOR: Oh, come along, Ben. Come along.

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

(The Doctor sees a thick cable stretching from the power unit into the
capsule.)  
BEN: There's somebody in there.  
DALEK: What are you doing here?  
DOCTOR: Stand aside. Servants shouldn't question.  
DALEK: Entry is restricted.  
DOCTOR: Not for me it isn't. Accord every access. I've got a badge.  
DALEK: That is an order.  
DOCTOR: A Dalek order. Short circuit the generator, Ben.  
DALEK: Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah! Stand back!  
DOCTOR: Don't be frightened of it, Ben. It's not armed. I'm going to see what
it was doing in there.  
(The Doctor stops as two armed Daleks glide from the capsule.)  
DOCTOR: Ben?  
BEN: What?  
DOCTOR: Let's get out of here.  
BEN: The fool. Lesterson must have reactivated them.  
DOCTOR: Yes. When I say run, run like a rabbit. Run!  
(The Doctor and Ben dash the lab.)  
DALEK: I have sent the human being for materials.  
DALEK 2: And power?  
DALEK: Yes. Power we can turn into static. Then we will conquer.  
DALEKS: We will conquer. We will conquer. We will conquer.

**[Governor's office]**

DOCTOR: But if you didn't do it, Lesterson, then the Dalek must have used your
power supply and reactivated the others itself.  
LESTERSON: I was going to do that anyway.  
BEN: Are you off your head, mate? Those two are armed!  
LESTERSON: Then we turn off the electricity, disarm them, and then everything
is safe again.  
DOCTOR: But I've already explained to you.  
HENSELL: Stop these arguments, both of you. I've had enough. I've every
confidence in Lesterson. He has carte blanche for the Daleks from now on.  
DOCTOR: But they must be destroyed!  
HENSELL: Bragen, I'm making a tour of the perimeter. I put you in direct
charge here. See that Lesterson gets everything he wants, will you?  
(Hensell leaves.)  
LESTERSON: I shall need a permanent guard on my laboratory, Bragen.  
DOCTOR: Huh.  
(The Doctor leaves, followed by Ben.)  
BRAGEN: Don't worry about the Examiner. I think I can keep him quiet.

**[Guest quarters]**

BEN: We've been forgetting about Polly.  
DOCTOR: Greed and ambition, that's all it is. Wait till they find out what
their precious production figures have cost them!  
(Bragen enters.)  
BEN: Oh, I want to see you.  
BRAGEN: What about?  
BEN: Well it's Polly, she's missing. We can't find her anywhere.  
(The Doctor starts playing his recorder.)  
BRAGEN: I'll tell one of my men to make enquiries. It shouldn't take long to
find her.  
BEN: Ah, thanks.  
BRAGEN: Examiner, some of my men have found a body in the mercury swamp. It
was the body of a middle-aged man.  
DOCTOR: What is that to do with me?  
BRAGEN: You're the Examiner. Or maybe you're not.  
DOCTOR: Just exactly what do you mean by that?  
BRAGEN: Who are you? Quinn's friends come to stir up rebellion?  
DOCTOR: There's only one possible way that you could know I'm not the
Examiner.  
BEN: Yeah, by knowing what the real Examiner looked like.  
DOCTOR: Exactly, Ben. Exactly! Only two people knew of his arrival on this
planet. Myself and his murderer.  
BRAGEN: That's enough!  
BEN: Is it? Doctor, we've got to tell the Governor.  
BRAGEN: Do you think he'll believe you? I'll soon convince him that you
murdered the man yourself. You stole the Examiner's badge.  
DOCTOR: Then why don't you arrest us? Because there's a doubt isn't there?
Because it might, it just might, go against you.  
BRAGEN: All right, all right, so neither of us wants to make a move. But you
leave Lesterson alone. And the Daleks!  
(Bragen leaves.)  
BEN: He'd make a right Father Christmas, wouldn't he?  
DOCTOR: Oh, I'd rather fight a hundred of his sort than just one Dalek.  
(An envelope is pushed under the door. Ben opens the door but the corridor is
empty. Ben picks up the letter.)  
BEN: Listen to this. The girl is safe. She will remain so as long as you leave
the Daleks alone.

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

(Two gun-sticks are on the bench.)  
LESTERSON: And did you disarm the other two?  
DALEK: Yes. We are your servants. We do not need guns.  
LESTERSON: I'm very glad. I knew the Examiner was wrong about you.  
DALEK: Did you get our materials?  
LESTERSON: Yes. Everything you need you can have.  
DALEK: And a power plant?  
LESTERSON: Everything.  
(The other two Daleks emerge from the capsule, both disarmed.)  
DALEK: We will get our power.  
DALEKS: We will get our power. We will get our power. We will get our power.

__**Episode Four**__

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

(As the Daleks close in, Lesterson goes to the generator and cuts the power
supply. Instantly, the Daleks movements become sluggish.)  
DALEK: (slow) Turn back the power supply.  
LESTERSON: I will, I will. But I want you to remember that I control you.  
DALEK: We are your servants.  
LESTERSON: I know. Remember it. I gave you each a special charge to bring you
back to life. Any further power you need must come from this generator, and I
control it. Is that clear?  
DALEK: We obey.  
(Lesterson returns the generator to full power. Two of the Daleks return to
the capsule.)  
LESTERSON: Where are they going?  
DALEK: To await your orders, master.  
LESTERSON: Good. Have you completed the blueprints for the meteor storm
computer?  
DALEK: It is ready.  
(They go to a table.)  
LESTERSON: Oh, it's marvellous! I'm glad we understand each other.  
DALEK: We understand the human mind.

**[Governor's office]**

(Bragen is dressed in the uniform of a Deputy Governor now. Valmar is
repairing the communications desk.)  
BRAGEN: Isn't that finished yet?  
VALMAR: Nearly. This is Valmar. Test call please.  
(The communicator buzzes.)  
VALMAR: Terrace. So I can hear you clearly all right, good. Now try and get in
connection now with the interior, and then the perimeter stations. Well, no
troubles now.  
BRAGEN: About time. This work should have been completed long before this.  
VALMAR: Well, I did the best I could.  
BRAGEN: Well, it isn't good enough.  
VALMAR: Then get someone else, Bragen.  
BRAGEN: Be careful. I shall be watching you, Valmar, after this. Now get out.  
(There's a commotion outside.)  
BEN [OC]: See Bragen.  
DOCTOR [OC]: Accord every access.  
BRAGEN: What does this intrusion mean?  
GUARD: I'm sorry, Bragen. I tried to stop them.  
DOCTOR: Intrusion? It's no intrusion. We're just returning the various calls
that you made. This guard tried to tell us you were busy. You're not a bit,
are you?  
BRAGEN: All right, I'll see them.  
DOCTOR: Oh, what a nice new uniform. Very smart, very smart. I would like a
hat like that.  
BRAGEN: Well, what do you want?  
BEN: Some joker has kidnapped Polly and sent us this note.  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
BEN: Well, we want to know what you're doing to find her.  
BRAGEN: Now that the communications are restored we can start a search.  
BEN: Yeah, I can just imagine what kind of job you'll make of that. Haven't
you heard anything yet?  
BRAGEN: The planet is a large one.  
(A Dalek enters, carrying a drink on a tray.)  
DOCTOR: So, they've given you the run of the colony, have they?  
DALEK: We obey.  
(The Doctor picks up a chair as if to defend himself.)  
DALEK: Do I bring liquid for your visitors?  
BRAGEN: No. They won't be staying much longer.  
(The Dalek leaves.)  
BEN: Look, Doctor, if he's not going to help us, we'll have to search for
Polly ourselves.  
BRAGEN: Sound advice. Why don't you, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Uh, uh. Examiner. I wonder how much longer they'll be able to move
around on these floors?  
BEN: Ay?  
DOCTOR: The floors. They're not metal.  
BEN: Doctor.  
(The Doctor and Ben leave. The video communicator on the desk flashes on.)  
HENSELL [on monitor]: Ah, there you are Bragen. Thank heavens the
communications are working again. It's bad enough being stuck out here on the
perimeter. Well? Your report, man. Hurry up. I've got a very full schedule.  
BRAGEN: There is nothing to report, Governor.  
HENSELL [on monitor]: The Examiner?  
BRAGEN: I'm taking good care of him.  
HENSELL [on monitor]: Good, you know my orders.  
BRAGEN: Yes, sir.  
HENSELL [on monitor]: All right. Well, you can reach me here if you have to,
that's all.  
BRAGEN: One moment, Governor. When will you be coming back?  
HENSELL [on monitor]: Oh, not for a day or two at least. You can manage, can't
you?  
BRAGEN: Yes. Yes, of course, Governor.  
(The Dalek has returned.)  
BRAGEN: What do you want?  
DALEK: Have you finished your liquid?  
BRAGEN: No. No, I haven't.

**[Corridor]**

(Janley is pinning a new sign to the notice board. Moving on, she meets Kebble
and sends him to the board.)  
JANLEY: You'd better check the agenda.  
KEBBLE: I'll do it now.  
(Kebble hurries away as the Doctor and Ben approach.)  
DOCTOR: Static, do you see. They need a constant supply of static from the
floor. Some sort of electrical field.  
(Ben sees Kebble leaving.)  
BEN: Doctor. Why should he?  
(Three Daleks go past.)  
DOCTOR: It's madness!  
BEN: What is?  
DOCTOR: Letting them run around like this.  
BEN: Hey, wait a minute. Bragen had one acting as a servant, and we've just
left him.  
DOCTOR: One Dalek in Bragen's office. Three Daleks just gone down the
corridors. That makes four.  
BEN: Where did the fourth one come from?  
DOCTOR: Well, Lesterson can't have been making them. Perhaps there were more
in the capsule than we thought.  
BEN: We must go and see Lesterson. Yeah, and show him this note. Maybe he or
Janley knows where Polly is.  
(The Doctor gazes at the notice board. Kebble comes back then turns away again
when he sees Ben.)  
BEN: We frightened him off. I wonder what the fascination of this notice board
is?  
DOCTOR: It looks like a perfectly ordinary notice board to me.  
BEN: Yeah, well, come on, Doctor. We must find out who's got Polly. Doctor,
come on!  
(The Doctor follows Ben. Kebble returns.)

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

LESTERSON: Janley?  
JANLEY: What is it?  
LESTERSON: The Daleks. They've given me another list of materials they need.  
JANLEY: Let me see. We've got all those things?  
LESTERSON: Yes, but why these quantities, Janley? Why? How can they have used
up all the materials I gave them? What is it? Why, it's only a matter of a few
hours ago.  
JANLEY: They're building new things for us.  
LESTERSON: Yes, well, I don't want them to do anything without consulting me.
What is it they do inside there?  
JANLEY: You're worrying too much.  
LESTERSON: Look, Janley, say what you like, but I'm beginning to believe that
the Examiner is right about the Daleks. Their original thinking terrifies me.
If we can control them, fine. But if not  
JANLEY: Yes?  
LESTERSON: Then I shall have them destroyed. It's too dangerous. The Examiner
knows something about them that we don't. I'm going to ask his advice.  
JANLEY: I wouldn't bring the Examiner into it if I were you.  
LESTERSON: And why not?  
JANLEY: You want him to find out about Resno?  
LESTERSON: Oh, a little accident. How is he? Is he better?  
JANLEY: He's dead.  
LESTERSON: What are you talking about? You told me he was  
JANLEY: You were busy with the experiments on the Daleks.  
LESTERSON: But you should have told me. But the body? It'll have to be
reported.  
JANLEY: Don't worry, no one will find the body.  
LESTERSON: Oh, Janley, you've done a terrible thing.  
JANLEY: The experiments on the Daleks were more important.  
LESTERSON: More important than human life? No, no, I won't accept that.  
JANLEY: You will. You must. Your carelessness was the cause of Resno's death.
You murdered him. It's only your word against mine.  
LESTERSON: I won't be blackmailed by you.  
JANLEY: All I want is for you to go on as you are. Scientific discovery can't
stop dead, Lesterson.  
(The Doctor and Ben enter.)  
LESTERSON: I told the guard that no-one was to be allowed in.  
DOCTOR: Accord every access, remember?  
BEN: We're looking for Polly.  
LESTERSON: Well, she isn't here, and I haven't seen her.  
BEN: Well, she's been kidnapped.  
LESTERSON: Oh, it sounds a little unlikely.  
BEN: Oh, it does, does it? Well, we've got this note which tells us so.  
LESTERSON: I'm very sorry, but I don't know anything about it.  
DOCTOR: Lesterson?  
LESTERSON: Yes?  
DOCTOR: You haven't been building Daleks, have you?  
LESTERSON: Building? No, I wouldn't know how to begin.  
DOCTOR: And there were only three in the capsule?  
LESTERSON: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Well, we've just seen four. One in the Governor's office and three in
the corridor.  
LESTERSON: But that's not possible!  
DOCTOR: There's only one explanation. The Daleks are reproducing themselves.  
JANLEY: These things are machines. How could they reproduce?  
DOCTOR: Machines? What makes you think they're just machines? The Daleks are
brilliant engineers. Nothing is beyond them given the right materials.  
LESTERSON: What?  
DOCTOR: I said nothing is beyond them given the right materials.  
LESTERSON: Oh.  
DOCTOR: Lesterson, what's the matter?  
LESTERSON: Oh.  
JANLEY: Leave him alone. He's just been overworking, that's all.  
BEN: Well, he looks bad.  
JANLEY: Will you both go away. Guard! It's you, badgering him with questions.
You've done nothing but hound him ever since you arrived on Vulcan. Bragen's
orders were that no one was to be admitted.  
GUARD: Yes, but I thought that the Examiner.  
JANLEY: He attacked Lesterson. Get them out of here. Both of them.  
BEN: He did not attack Lesterson!  
JANLEY: Out, do you hear?  
BEN: All right, all right.  
(The guard leads the Doctor and Ben out. Janley uses the communications unit.)  
JANLEY: Janley here. Tell Valmar to come over to the lab right away. Good.
Now, it's all right. Come on. Rest here for a bit. There. You've been doing
far too much.  
(Janley gives Lesterson a glass of water.)  
JANLEY: Shh.  
(When Valmar arrives, Lesterson is fast asleep.)  
JANLEY: I've sedated him.  
VALMAR: Well, what's the matter with him?  
JANLEY: Overwork, I suppose. He just suddenly broke up. Anyway, it'll give you
a chance to lay in the new power cable the Daleks have asked for.  
VALMAR: You don't miss a trick, do you?  
(Janley goes to the Dalek capsule.)  
JANLEY: We're going to lay in the new cables you wanted.  
DALEK: Good.  
VALMAR: You're sure this is okay, Janley?  
JANLEY: Of course. We help them, they help us.  
DALEK: Yes. We are your servants.  
JANLEY: Don't take too long about it, Valmar. Oh, you saw the notice, did you?  
VALMAR: I saw it.

**[Corridor]**

(Back at the notice board.)  
BEN: Well, we're still no nearer finding Polly. What are we hanging about here
for?  
DOCTOR: Ben, I've found a message in code. It's an anagram, you just take the
capital letters, see? Work it out yourself.  
BEN: Oh, I can't do crosswords.  
DOCTOR: Meeting tonight, 2000 hours. R O C K E T -- Rocket. R O O M - Room. P.
Rocket Room P.  
(The Doctor lets a Dalek go past.)  
DOCTOR: It's the rebel's way of calling a meeting. Only tonight we're going to
be there, early.  
BEN: Yeah, maybe we're nearer finding Polly than I thought.

**[Rocket room P]**

(Later, the Doctor and Ben are hiding behind a pile of boxes.)  
BEN: Ow. I've got pins and needles now.  
DOCTOR: What's the time?  
BEN: Time we went home.  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
(The rebels start filing into the room, taking their places around a large
table. Valmar brings a Dalek in. Janley has a Dalek gun-stick attached to a
control box. Valmar fastens the gun-stick to the Dalek. )  
JANLEY: Now, we're going to demonstrate something. You section leaders can
pass on what you've seen. So far, we've been concerned with testing the
strength of the Governor with a few acts of sabotage. But now we're ready to
take over.  
KEBBLE: What is that thing? I've seen them moving about, but all we've been
told is that it's a machine Lesterson discovered.  
JANLEY: Valmar.  
VALMAR: Lesterson removed the armaments of the Daleks he discovered. I've
rearmed this one, but with a controlling device. We can regulate the fire
power and turn it off and on whenever we choose.  
JANLEY: Shall we have the demonstration now?  
(A shadowy figure nods.)  
BEN: That's the one we want. He must be the boss of this outfit.  
JANLEY: This screen is two inch thick tungsten steel. Right, Valmar.  
VALMAR: Fire at the screen.  
(The metal screen is totally destroyed. Consternation.)  
JANLEY: Quiet! You must keep quiet. We're too vulnerable here.  
KEBBLE: But you can't control a thing like that. It'll turn on us.  
JANLEY: No, it won't.  
KEBBLE: I wouldn't let any of my group go anywhere near it.  
VALMAR: I can control it.  
KEBBLE: Prove it. Ah, you daren't! I'm not talking about that thing firing at
the wall or bits of metal or anything. I mean people. Have you tested whether
you can stop it from killing people? Our people?  
VALMAR: Look, I can show you what I've done here.  
KEBBLE: Forget it. How do you know a Dalek can tell the difference between the
Governor's people and our people?  
VALMAR: But I can tell the difference, you fool, and I control it.  
KEBBLE: We want something better than words.  
JANLEY: Test it on me. Will that satisfy you?  
KEBBLE: Well yes, but  
BEN: She's out of her mind.  
(Valmar looks at the man in the shadows.)  
VALMAR: Is it all right?  
(The man agrees. Janley stands in front of the Dalek.)  
VALMAR: Now, when I tell you to fire  
DALEK: I am your servant.  
(Valmar flicks a switch, and taps the Dalek on its dome. The weapon does no
damage.)  
JANLEY: Get back to your places.  
KEBBLE: Are you all right?  
JANLEY: Of course. I don't take needless risks.  
VALMAR: Oh, well done, Janley.  
JANLEY: You haven't disarmed the Dalek. Well, go on, take the gun away. We
don't want any accidents. Now, what about the girl?  
KEBBLE: We've got her safely locked up. Never fear.  
JANLEY: I think the best thing for us to do is  
BEN: Hear that? Maybe they'll say were she is.  
(Ben sends a box crashing to the floor.)  
JANLEY: Who's there?  
BEN: You stay there, I'll distract them. Find out where Polly is.  
JANLEY: No!  
BEN: Help! Help!  
(Ben runs out and Kebble grabs him and knocks him out.)  
JANLEY: The guards will have heard that! Come on we've got to get out of here!
Take him and lock him up! Quick! Out!  
(Kebble and another man drag Ben away. Janley and the rebels follow, leaving
the leader and the Dalek in the room.)  
BRAGEN: You might as well come out. We know you're there.  
(The Dalek goes to the Doctor's hiding place.)  
DOCTOR: Bragen.  
BRAGEN: Of course. Who else is fitted to be leader of the rebels?  
DOCTOR: No doubt you want to be leader of the Daleks too.  
BRAGEN: I am the leader of the Daleks.  
DOCTOR: Well, see if you can stop this one from killing me.  
BRAGEN: Stop! You heard me, that's an order. Turn away. Fetch the guard.  
(The Dalek hesitates.)  
DALEK: I obey.  
DOCTOR: You hope to have it both ways, Bragen. But how will you look in front
of the Governor, when I explain your dual role to him?  
BRAGEN: The Governor will hardly listen to an impostor.  
DOCTOR: An impostor? How do you propose to prove that?  
BRAGEN: My guards are now going to produce the body of the real Examiner from
the mercury swamp.  
DOCTOR: The one you murdered.  
BRAGEN: The one you pretended to be.  
DOCTOR: Murder's a far worse crime than impersonation.  
BRAGEN: Yes, but you can't prove I'm a murderer, while I can prove that you're
an impostor.  
(The Dalek returns with Janley and two guards.)  
BRAGEN: Take this man away. Detain him.  
(The guards escort the Doctor out.)  
JANLEY: A dangerous man.  
BRAGEN: Now the only one left is the Governor.  
JANLEY: Perhaps we should have dealt with the Examiner earlier.  
BRAGEN: I'll deal with him in time, and Quinn.

**[Cell block]**

(A guard uses a sonic key to open the cell next to Quinn, put the Doctor
inside and relock it. The guards leave.)  
QUINN: You're the last man I expected to see here.  
DOCTOR: Hmm. Works by sound, does it?  
QUINN: I'm speaking to you, Examiner.  
DOCTOR: Oh, I'm sorry.  
QUINN: If you'd listened to me in the first place, you wouldn't be locked up
here now.  
DOCTOR: Well, your imprisonment hasn't been entirely wasted. It's brought your
enemy out into the open.  
QUINN: Bragen? I've known that all along.  
DOCTOR: Yes. But did you know that he was the leader of the rebels?  
QUINN: Bragen, the leader?  
DOCTOR: Yes. It's quite a simple sort of lock, really.  
(The Doctor empties his pockets.)  
QUINN: Hensell's trouble is he thinks he can run this colony on his
personality alone.  
DOCTOR: But even if he knew of the danger, could he do anything? The rebels
are well organised.  
QUINN: The Governor's popular. He can count on the mine workers at the
perimeter for support.  
DOCTOR: In that case we must get word to him.  
QUINN: If you'd done your job properly, Examiner, you wouldn't be here now,
and I'd have been out too.  
DOCTOR: Ah yes, but then I'm not the real Examiner.  
(The Doctor chooses a dog whistle from his collection.)  
DOCTOR: Ben, Polly and I, we're just travellers, that's all. I found the
Examiner dead. Bragen murdered him.  
(The Doctor blows the high pitched whistle at the lock.)  
QUINN: Everything leads back friend Bragen. Just give me a chance get my hands
on him.  
DOCTOR: We aren't going to have that chance unless we can get out of here.  
QUINN: There's just a little matter of the cell doors.  
(The doors don't open, but a dog starts barking outside.)

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

(Lesterson wakes. He gets a wet handkerchief and presses it to his face. A
Dalek enters and he hides. It goes to the capsule and another Dalek comes
out.)  
DALEK 2: You sent for me?  
DALEK: Take up a position at the communications room. Watch and report.  
DALEK 2: I obey.  
LESTERSON: They're conspiring together! Oh, why didn't I realise? The Examiner
was right. They are evil!  
(Two more Daleks come out of the capsule and all three leave.)  
LESTERSON: There are four. They can't be reproducing!

**[Capsule]**

(Lesterson discovers a new section has been opened up, A corridor slopes down
and away round a corner. Mechanical sounds echo from below. Lesterson goes
through two doors to a small ante-room. Through a glass wall he sees a huge
chamber with a long production line. At the far end, the lower half of a Dalek
appears on the conveyor belt. It goes under an archway where mechanical arms
reach in to do something then pull back. Then the casing is steam-cleaned and
smothered in foam. Further along the belt it stops by a tank, where another
Dalek nets a green tentacled creature and puts it into the casing where probes
insert themselves into its body. Under a second archway, the Dalek receives
it's dome. A final spray, and the machine comes to life. It leaves the
conveyor belt for it's final check as another lower case has started it's
journey at the far end.)  
DALEK: Dalek nine complete.  
DALEK 2: Check.  
NEW DALEK: (under the count) We are the new race of Daleks.  
DALEK: Dalek ten complete.  
DALEK 2: Check.  
DALEK: Dalek eleven complete.  
DALEK 2: Check.  
DALEK: Dalek twelve complete.  
DALEK 2: Check.  
DALEK: Dalek thirteen complete.  
DALEK 2: Check.  
DALEK: Dalek fourteen complete.  
DALEK 2: Check.  
DALEK: Dalek fifteen complete.  
DALEK 2: Check.  
DALEK: Dalek sixteen complete.  
DALEK 2: Check.  
DALEK: Dalek seventeen complete.  
DALEK 2: Check.  
DALEK: Dalek eighteen complete.

__**Episode Five**__

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

(Lesterson closes the capsule door, then drags a heavy cabinet in front of it.
Janley enters.)  
JANLEY: What's the matter? What is it? Are you ill?  
LESTERSON: They're in there, making themselves! Duplicating!  
JANLEY: What? What are you talking about?  
LESTERSON: I started this, opening the capsule.  
JANLEY: Lesterson!  
LESTERSON: Don't try to stop me!  
JANLEY: What happened?  
(The generator is turned off.)  
LESTERSON: They forget that I control them. I gave them life back again, and
now I've taken it away. Finished it, stopped it.  
JANLEY: The Daleks?  
LESTERSON: Evil. Horrible. I know what I'm going to do. Laser torches. Melt
them down. I'm going to melt the Daleks down to pools of metal.  
JANLEY: You won't, Lesterson.  
LESTERSON: Oh, do you think I care what you can do? Go on, tell everybody I
was responsible for Resno's death. I don't care! I'm going to wipe out the
Daleks! Yes, tell everybody all about me! I'm still going to I'm going to wipe
out the Daleks!  
(Janley leaves. Lesterson lifts the communications receiver.)  
LESTERSON: Get me the Examiner. Prison? Who put him there? But I've got to
talk to him! I've got to, don't you understand?  
(The capsule door opens, pushing the cabinet aside. A Dalek moves up behind
Lesterson.)  
LESTERSON: How did you get there? I cut off the power.  
DALEK: We can store power. We will soon have our own.  
LESTERSON: Own power?  
DALEK: Why was the capsule door closed?  
LESTERSON: Own power! Argh!  
(Lesterson flees. Another Dalek enters.)  
DALEK: Seal off the capsule's secret entrance.  
DALEK 2: I obey.  
DALEK: Wait! No more than three Daleks to be seen together at any one time.  
DALEK 2: I obey.  
DALEK: We are not ready yet to teach these human beings the law of the Daleks.

**[Corridor]**

LESTERSON: You can help me!  
GUARD: What's the matter?  
LESTERSON: Where's the Examiner?  
GUARD: The Examiner's in prison.  
LESTERSON: Oh, yes.  
GUARD: What's the matter with you?  
LESTERSON: I forgot.  
GUARD: What are you running for? Hey!

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

(Janley and Kebble take Polly to the laboratory. A Dalek comes from the
capsule.)  
JANLEY: Did Lesterson come back?  
DALEK: No. Why is this human restricted?  
JANLEY: She's against the Daleks. Afraid, are you? Nothing's going to happen
to you if you behave.  
POLLY: The Daleks? Of course I'm afraid, and so should you be.  
JANLEY: The Daleks are going to help us.  
POLLY: Us being the rebels, I suppose.  
JANLEY: If you like.  
POLLY: And when you've won, the Daleks will just go back to being servants
again? You're bigger fools than I thought.  
DALEK: We are your servants.  
POLLY: While it suits you.  
JANLEY: You'll see.  
KEBBLE: In!  
(Kebble pushes Polly into the capsule.)  
KEBBLE: You want me to stay with her?  
JANLEY: Yes. You may have to help Valmar. He'll be here in a minute to fix up
the new Dalek power cable.  
KEBBLE: Right.  
DALEK: When will the work be completed?  
JANLEY: What is this cable you Daleks are laying, anyway?  
DALEK: Daleks operate on static electricity.  
JANLEY: Static! Is that possible?  
DALEK: To create static, the Daleks need a complete cable circuit.  
JANLEY: I see. You convert our electricity into your own power.  
DALEK: That is correct. When will the human being complete the work?  
JANLEY: He'll be here. It's easier now. There's no-one to interfere with our
plans.

**[Cell block]**

(The dog whistle has not done the trick so the Doctor is running a wet finger
around the rim of a glass instead.)  
QUINN: Do you have to do that? I'm afraid you'll find these locks are
foolproof.  
DOCTOR: I wonder how they're converting the power?  
QUINN: What are you talking about?  
DOCTOR: The Daleks. They're powered by static electricity. It's like blood to
them, a constant life-stream.  
QUINN: Static isn't workable.  
DOCTOR: It is to the Daleks. They've conquered static, just as they've
conquered anti-magnetics.  
QUINN: I'm not going to listen to any more of this nonsense.  
DOCTOR: I don't seem to be able to hit the right note. Do you have any more
water?  
QUINN: I hope not. No.  
DOCTOR: Then I shall have to get some.  
GUARD: You can't!  
LESTERSON: But it's important! It's desperately important!  
GUARD: Well, Bragen gave orders.  
LESTERSON: Just get out of my way! Ah! Examiner! The Daleks !  
DOCTOR: Yes?  
LESTERSON: They're duplicating! I've seen them! They've got their own power
now! I can't stop them!  
GUARD: Take him to Bragen.  
LESTERSON: Oh! Oh! Oh!  
DOCTOR: I say. I say, do you think we might have a little more water?  
QUINN: Is that all you can say? Lesterson fights his way down here to speak to
you and all you can do is demand more water?  
(The guard fetches a jug.)  
GUARD: Get away from the door.  
(The Doctor backs away and listens carefully to the tone of the sonic key. The
guard puts down the jug, locks the door and leaves.)  
QUINN: Sorry about that outburst. I thought it might help the situation.  
(The Doctor adds a little more water to his glass.)  
QUINN: Nearly, nearly.

**[Governor's office]**

(A Dalek is laying a cable around the room. Bragen is working at his desk when
is brought in Lesterson under guard.)  
BRAGEN: What's this?  
GUARD: He tried to break in and speak with the Examiner.  
LESTERSON: What is the Dalek doing?!  
BRAGEN: I thought you knew. Something to do with the emergency power supply.  
LESTERSON: Oh, no. It's a trick. I didn't ask for it.  
BRAGEN: Lesterson, I've had reports.  
LESTERSON: What are you doing?!  
DALEK: Laying the new emergency power supply as you ordered, master.  
LESTERSON: It's a lie!  
BRAGEN: I've had reports of your incomprehensible behaviour.  
LESTERSON: Yes. Yes, but I can explain if you'll get rid of that!  
BRAGEN: Finish now.  
DALEK: I am your servant.  
(The Dalek leaves.)  
LESTERSON: Where is the Governor?!  
BRAGEN: At the perimeter. Why?  
LESTERSON: Call him. Get him back here as quickly as possible. We're all in
terrible danger! The Examiner was right! Right all the time!  
(Janley enters.)  
LESTERSON: Don't listen to anything she has to say.  
JANLEY: Come along now.  
LESTERSON: She's in league with the Daleks!  
JANLEY: Now, now, now, now. Please, Lesterson. Just take things calmly. You're
not well.  
LESTERSON: I'm perfectly well!  
JANLEY: Please, Lesterson, please. Now, you ought to be in hospital. You
promised me you'd report there.  
LESTERSON: I promised nothing of the kind.  
JANLEY: Don't you remember? Never mind. I understand.  
BRAGEN: Pity. It's probably only temporary.  
LESTERSON: You're trying to say I'm mad.  
BRAGEN: No, no, not mad.  
JANLEY: No, of course not. No.  
LESTERSON: But I tell you, I saw the Daleks. They were duplicating! I saw it!
I swear to you!  
JANLEY: He suddenly started saying these things in the lab. I'm afraid he's  
LESTERSON: Oh, no! No!  
BRAGEN: Keep him under restraint.  
LESTERSON: Oh, will nobody listen to me?!

**[Capsule]**

(Polly sits on the floor, watching Valmar work on a power connector. A Dalek
is watching them.)  
VALMAR: Pass me that small screwdriver.  
POLLY: I can't. My hands are tied. Anyway, I wouldn't help you even if I
could.  
VALMAR: Okay.  
(Kebble appears with more cable.)  
VALMAR: More? I can't handle them.  
KEBBLE: This is the lot.  
POLLY: Listen. The Dalek's gone now.  
KEBBLE: That doesn't mean you can start talking.  
VALMAR: Oh, leave her alone, Kebble. She isn't doing any harm.  
POLLY: You think you're very tough don't you, pushing a girl around. I'd like
to see you come up against a real man.  
KEBBLE: Like who?  
POLLY: Like Ben, for instance.  
KEBBLE: Don't worry about him. We've got him safely stowed away.  
POLLY: You've got Ben?  
KEBBLE: He's sleeping off a slight fall.  
VALMAR: I told you to leave her alone.  
POLLY: Your name's Valmar, isn't it?  
VALMAR: That's it.  
POLLY: You want the Daleks to fight the Governor. But don't you see? They'll
turn on you, too.  
KEBBLE: What? Three big pepper pots?  
VALMAR: One of them did kill Resno. And you saw what the Dalek did to that
sheet of metal.  
POLLY: And that's just the beginning.  
KEBBLE: Don't listen to her. She's giving you the Examiner's line.  
POLLY: He isn't the Examiner. We're just travellers, landed here by accident.
The Doctor, that's the man you think is the Examiner, found the real Examiner
dead and picked up his papers.  
VALMAR: This Doctor of yours. He knows something about the Daleks?  
POLLY: He's tried to warn everyone. It's the only reason we stayed here.  
DALEK: When will the work be completed?  
VALMAR: I don't know. I'll need a new junction box like this one.  
(The Dalek leaves.)  
POLLY: You've all underestimated these Daleks.  
KEBBLE: Better brains than us, I suppose.  
POLLY: I only know what the Doctor has told me. He says they're capable of
exterminating whole nations.  
VALMAR: Perhaps, but what would they want to kill us for, after we've taken
over. We're friendly with the Daleks.  
POLLY: But don't you see? Human beings can't be friends with Daleks. They
don't have friends.  
VALMAR: I don't see why not.  
POLLY: It's a kind of hatred for anything unlike themselves. They think
they're superior.  
VALMAR: The girl's got something.  
KEBBLE: You want to tell Janley, you're welcome.  
POLLY: Janley! She'll betray the lot of you, if she gets the chance.  
DALEK: The other junction box is outside.  
VALMAR: Thank you.  
KEBBLE: Talk too much, don't you? Didn't you know he was soft on Janley? All
right, all right, I'm just putting her straight.  
VALMAR: More slack on the cables.

**[Corridor]**

(A Dalek is laying a thick power cable along the wall. is draped over its
sucker-stick. The Dalek detects the sounds of voices ahead. It turns back, and
moves out of sight as two humans appear.)  
HENSELL: What are all these cables lying about?  
GUARD: New emergency power supply.  
HENSELL: Who's idea was that?  
GUARD: What do you want to know for?  
HENSELL: What do I? Don't you know I'm the Governor? Where are you from?  
GUARD: The interior, sir.  
HENSELL: The interior? Why are you carrying a gun?  
GUARD: I'm a Squad Leader in Bragen's guard, sir.  
HENSELL: Oh, I see. Bragen's guard, ay? All right, carry on.

**[Cell block]**

GUARD: Cut that row out, you two.  
(The Doctor plays his recorder as Quinn creeps out of his unlocked cell and
pounces on the guard.)  
GUARD: What the? Oh!  
(Quinn knocks the guard out then unlocks the Doctor's cell.)  
QUINN: Come on.  
DOCTOR: Wait a minute.  
(They lock the guard in the cell after the Doctor removes the jug and glass of
water.)  
DOCTOR: We don't want him trying it, although he seemed a bit tone deaf to me.

**[Governor's office]**

HENSELL: Well, Bragen, these trips are becoming more and more demanding.  
BRAGEN: I didn't expect you, Governor.  
HENSELL: Oh, I had as much as I could stand. Well, what's been happening here?  
BRAGEN: One moment.  
HENSELL: I asked you a question, man.  
BRAGEN: I heard you.  
HENSELL: Look, your work can wait. You can hand over to me tomorrow. I want to
hear about the Examiner.  
BRAGEN: The Examiner is at present in jail.  
HENSELL: In jail? That's rather dangerous, isn't it? Who put him there?  
BRAGEN: I did.  
HENSELL: You did? In heaven's sake, why?  
BRAGEN: He's an impostor, Governor. Possibly a murderer as well. We've just
discovered the body of the real Examiner in the mercury swamp.  
HENSELL: I hope you're sure of your facts, Bragen.  
BRAGEN: Quite sure.  
HENSELL: This could have far reaching consequences.  
BRAGEN: As far as I am concerned, there's nothing more to be said. So if
there's nothing further  
HENSELL: Nothing further? Who the devil do you think you're talking to? Stand
up when you're speaking to me, man!  
BRAGEN: I prefer to remain seated.  
HENSELL: Do you now? We'll soon see about that. Guards! Take this man out of
my office. Did you hear what I said? That's an order!  
BRAGEN: You forget, my dear Hensell. They're not your guards, they're mine.  
HENSELL: I am the Governor.  
BRAGEN: No. Not now. I am.  
HENSELL: Oh, I see. Your guards, ay? Yes, Quinn warned me about your guards,
but we all took them too lightly, didn't we? But we'll soon change that.  
(Hensell moves to the door, but guards block his way.)  
HENSELL: You imbecile! How long do you think your handful of guards can hang
out when the people hear that I am being kept a prisoner in my own capital?  
BRAGEN: The people will do exactly as they are told, Hensell. It will, of
course, be easier for them if you co-operate with us.  
(Bragen pushes a button on the desk, then motions for Hensell to take his
seat. The Governor sits at his desk. Then a Dalek enters and stops next to
Bragen.)  
BRAGEN: Wait there. Guards, dismissed.  
HENSELL: So, Bragen, you want my cooperation, do you?  
BRAGEN: It would save bloodshed. I might even let you keep the title of
Governor.  
HENSELL: Might you now? I'll tell you what you will do. You'll order your
guards to disarm and place yourself under arrest immediately!  
BRAGEN: So you reject my offer. I thought it a generous one in the
circumstances.  
HENSELL: What circumstances?  
BRAGEN: Look at this.  
HENSELL: What is it?  
(Bragen unwraps a Dalek gun-stick.)  
BRAGEN: The reason that the colony is now mine.  
(Bragen attaches the gun-stick to the Dalek.)  
HENSELL: Is it a weapon of some kind?  
BRAGEN: I'll arrange a demonstration for you. Do you still refuse my offer?  
HENSELL: I will not be intimidated.  
BRAGEN: Of course not. In character to the last, Hensell. Kill him!  
(The Dalek obeys.)  
DALEK: Why do human beings kill human beings?  
BRAGEN: Get on with your work.  
DALEK: Yes, master. I obey.  
BRAGEN: Yes, obey me! From now on, I'll have complete obedience from everyone!

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

(The Doctor and Quinn hide under a workbench. A Dalek comes out of the
capsule, followed by Valmar.)  
VALMAR: I'll have to check the cable circuit now. Otherwise it's just as you
asked for.  
DALEK: Very well.  
VALMAR: Why can't you carry on with the power you're drawing from the colony?
Why go to all this trouble?  
DALEK: Until now, we have had to recharge from the colony supply. With static
power, the Daleks will be twice as (pause) useful.  
(Janley runs in.)  
JANLEY: Valmar, quick!  
VALMAR: What's the matter?  
JANLEY: The Governor's back.  
VALMAR: What about the girl?  
JANLEY: Leave her.  
DALEK: I will follow you.  
VALMAR: What for?  
DALEK: I am your servant.  
JANLEY: Come on.  
(Janley, Valmar and the Dalek leave. The Doctor and Quinn come out.)  
DOCTOR: An electrical circuit of their own supplying static electricity! I
wonder how much longer we've got?

**[Capsule]**

DOCTOR [OC]: I didn't realise they'd have a circuit of their own.  
(Kebble picks up a wrench.)  
POLLY: Doctor, look out!

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

(Quinn launches himself at Kebble, who feints and swings the wrench at Quinn's
head. Quinn ducks and rolls to the workbench to get Lesterson's laser. He
shoots Kebble in the hand and Kebble drops the wrench. Quinn knocks him out.)  
POLLY: Are you all right?  
DOCTOR: Well done! Who was the man who went outside just now?  
POLLY: Valmar. He's been working for the Daleks.  
DOCTOR: On their static power supply.  
POLLY: Doctor, they've got Ben.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I know. He ran away so that I could. Oh well, it's a long story.
But don't worry, that boy can take care of himself.  
QUINN: Did you hear that? That won't help.  
DOCTOR: Get out, all of you!  
QUINN: What about you?  
POLLY: But Doctor!  
DOCTOR: Go!  
(Polly and Quinn and Polly run out into the corridor. The Doctor picks up the
wrench and follows, slamming the lab doors behind him and jamming the wrench
through the handles. The Dalek cannot follow.)  
DALEK 2: Have they escaped?  
DALEK: Yes, return to capsule and report.  
DALEK 2: I obey.  
(The Dalek fires its gun at the door. The door buckles and gives way, and the
Dalek leaves.)

**[Capsule]**

DALEK: We are to wait here until the human beings fight among themselves.  
DALEK 2: Then we will strike.  
DALEK: And exterminate!  
ALL DALEKS: Exterminate! Exterminate! Exterminate! Exterminate! Exterminate!
Exterminate! Exterminate! Exterminate! Exterminate! Exterminate! Exterminate!
Exterminate! Exterminate! Exterminate! Exterminate! Exterminate! Exterminate!

**[Governor's office]**

(The Doctor, Quinn and Polly discover Hensall's body.)  
QUINN: The one man who could have saved us.  
DOCTOR: Don't worry. The people will follow you, too.  
QUINN: Maybe. But there wasn't any maybe about Hensell. He was old-fashioned,
single-minded, yes, but he's done a lot of wonderful work for this colony.
Events turned out against him, that's all. But why? Why was he killed?  
BRAGEN: I can answer that.  
(Bragen is flanked by armed guards.)  
BRAGEN: He wanted to destroy the Daleks, so one of them killed him. Now I'm
declaring martial law. You will be returned to prison and properly guarded
this time.  
DOCTOR: Martial law? What good do you think that will do against the Daleks?  
BRAGEN: The Daleks will do as I tell them.  
DOCTOR: We shall see, shan't we.  
BRAGEN: Take them away.  
(Bragen has the corpse removed.)

**[Capsule]**

ALL DALEKS: Exterminate! Exterminate! Exterminate!  
DALEK 2: Orders received. Exterminate all humans!  
DALEK: Exterminate all humans!  
DALEK 2: Exterminate! Annihilate! Destroy! Daleks conquer and destroy!  
ALL DALEKS: Daleks conquer and destroy! Daleks conquer and destroy! Daleks
conquer and destroy! Daleks conquer and destroy! Daleks conquer and destroy!
Daleks conquer and destroy! Daleks conquer and destroy!

__**Episode Six**__

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

DALEK: Take up positions, ready to exterminate all human beings.  
DALEK 3: Exterminate!  
ALL DALEKS: Exterminate! Exterminate! Exterminate! Exterminate!

**[Corridor]**

(Two guards are escorting the Doctor, Polly and Quinn to the detention area.
The Doctor stops. A Dalek has taken up position ahead of them.)  
GUARD: Move on!  
DOCTOR: The Dalek!  
POLLY: What about it?  
DOCTOR: Can't you see it's armed?  
GUARD: Keep moving!  
(The Dalek bars their way.)  
DALEK: This area is restricted.  
QUINN: On whose authority?  
GUARD: Silence!  
DALEK: Repeat. This area is restricted.  
(Another Dalek appears behind them.)  
DALEK 2: Obey or you shall be exterminated.  
QUINN: I thought they obeyed us?  
POLLY: What do we do now, Doctor?  
QUINN: This way.  
(The Doctor and Polly follow Quinn, with the guards following.)  
DALEK: They will be exterminated.

**[Governor's office]**

JANLEY: We've won. The revolution's over. I'll pass the word to Valmar, Kebble
and the rest.  
BRAGEN: Wait. The revolution is not quite over yet.  
JANLEY: What more can we do? Hensell's dead, you're the new Governor. The
battle's over.  
BRAGEN: Not quite. You mentioned Kebble, Valmar and that rabble. Well, now
they must be dealt with.  
JANLEY: But those are our own men.  
BRAGEN: Of course.  
JANLEY: I don't understand.  
BRAGEN: Do you think I can ever be secure in that chair while that rabble are
still loose? They rebelled against Hensell yesterday. Tomorrow it'll be my
turn. Well, let them rebel. Tell them the guards have taken control. Let them
attack, and then we can crush them utterly.  
JANLEY: You say we.  
BRAGEN: Yes. We've come a long way together, you and I. Are you going to back
down now?  
JANLEY: Couldn't you just arrest them?  
BRAGEN: Everyone must be killed.  
JANLEY: Must they all be slaughtered?  
BRAGEN: All of them.  
(Behind Janley, Bragen reaches into a drawer and gets a pistol.)  
BRAGEN: Well, are you still with me?  
JANLEY: I suppose so.  
BRAGEN: Then do as I say.  
(Bragen lays the gun on the desk.)  
BRAGEN: I'm glad you agreed with me.  
(Valmar was outside and has overheard everything.)

**[Corridor]**

(The Doctor, Polly and Quinn now have a guard front and rear. An unarmed Dalek
appears.)  
DOCTOR: Now!  
(Quinn takes out the rear guard. The other guard fires as they rush off, but
misses them.)

**[Guest quarters]**

BEN: What have you brought me in here for?  
VALMAR: Quiet!  
BEN: Whose side are you on anyway?  
VALMAR: I thought I was going to be on the winning side.  
BEN: What changed your mind?  
VALMAR: Bragen. The colony's become too small for him. He wants us out of the
way now.  
BEN: Yeah, well, it often happens that way, mate, when you follow blokes like
him.  
VALMAR: Look, I'm going to try and get your friends here, if I can. So wait
here.

**[Governor's office]**

(The communications unit buzzes.)  
GUARD [on monitor]: Section one reporting, Governor Bragen.  
BRAGEN: Yes.  
GUARD [on monitor]: The rebels are gathering. We've got them under
observation.  
BRAGEN: Don't let them concentrate in large groups. Hit them before they
organise. They'll be making their move any time now.  
GUARD [on monitor]: Right.  
(Communication ends. Bragen looks over a document then makes a colony-wide
broadcast.)  
BRAGEN: People of Vulcan. This is your new Governor talking to you. I have to
announce that Governor Hensell has been murdered by the rebels. I have taken
control temporarily until order is restored. People living on the perimeter
and in the interior can stay calm. We know who the murderers are.

**[Guest quarters]**

BRAGEN [OC]: I shall keep you informed of events as soon as I am able, so
listen for the signal to watch your communication sets. That is all.  
(The Doctor, Polly and Quinn enter.)  
DOCTOR: Ah! There you are.  
POLLY: Ben!  
DOCTOR: I knew you'd be all right!  
BEN: Polly, you okay?  
POLLY: Oh, yes.  
BEN: Did Valmar find you, then?  
POLLY: Valmar? No.  
QUINN: What's this about Valmar?  
BEN: Well it seems Bragen's gone power mad. He wants the rebels to revolt,
then he can finish them off.  
DOCTOR: The Daleks won't care who they fight. They'll exterminate every human
being on this planet.  
POLLY: Doctor, oh please, let's go back to the Tardis.  
DOCTOR: Quinn, keep them both here.  
BEN: Well, wait a minute, Doctor!  
(Quinn blocks Ben's way.)  
BEN: All right. All right.  
QUINN: Now what do you think he's up to?  
DALEK [OC]: Orders received. Daleks commence extermination.  
ALL DALEKS [OC]: Exterminate! Exterminate! Exterminate!

**[Corridor]**

(Gunfire is heard everywhere.)  
KEBBLE: Just a minute, Examiner.  
GUARD: All right, hold it!  
(The Doctor drops to the floor.)  
DOCTOR: Down everyone!  
(A Dalek fires, killing one of the guards. A second guard returns fire but is
also killed. The Doctor grabs Kebble and they run off. The Dalek follows.)

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

(Valmar is connecting control wires to three Daleks.)  
VALMAR: Don't come any nearer.  
JANLEY: What do you mean?  
VALMAR: I overheard your conversation with Bragen. But you can't stand up to
the Daleks, so your plan will come to nothing.  
JANLEY: Not my plan. Bragen's.  
VALMAR: But that's the same thing.  
JANLEY: Not any more.  
VALMAR: You expect me to believe that?  
JANLEY: Look, Val, he was going to kill me too. I came here to do exactly what
you've done. Let Bragen see what the Daleks are like. He doesn't know how
strong they are. He's got to be stopped.  
DALEK: You will lead us to the middle of your party of human beings.  
VALMAR: Yes.  
DALEK: We will fight (pause) for you.  
JANLEY: Believe me, Val, it's the only way to save all our lives.  
VALMAR: Did you know that the Daleks are duplicating?  
JANLEY: Yes.  
DALEK: But we are your friends.  
DALEK 2: We will serve you.  
DALEK 3: Take us to the centre of your group.  
VALMAR: Can we trust them?  
JANLEY: We must! The guards have orders to wipe us out. We must use the
Daleks. Come on.

**[Guest quarters]**

(Kebble has gone.)  
POLLY: Doctor!  
DOCTOR: The window. Does it open?  
BEN: I don't know.  
DOCTOR: It had better, or we're done for! Out you go.  
POLLY: What's happening?  
DOCTOR: The Daleks. They're teeming all over the corridors. We've got to get
back to Lesterson's lab.  
(Kebble appears in the doorway and is shot in the back by a Dalek. The Doctor
gets through the window just as a Dalek enters.)

**[Governor's office]**

BRAGEN: This is Governor Bragen speaking. A group of rebels is attempting to
take over the colony. It is the duty of all loyal citizens to help the guards
resist. Stay in your homes. Order will be restored. Listen to my bulletins.  
GUARD: The rebels are using the Daleks against our people!  
BRAGEN: Well, get back and fight! Why do you come running to me? What do you
think your guns are for?  
GUARD: Well, the guns don't work against them!  
BRAGEN: Get back and fight them!

**[Corridor]**

(The rebels have constructed a barricade of boxes. They are shooting at a
group of Bragen's guards when Janley and Valmar with their controlled Daleks.)  
JANLEY: There and there!  
(The Dalek fires at the guards.)  
JANLEY: Over there! No! No! Over there! They're our people!  
VALMAR: Cut the Dalek gun off!  
JANLEY: No!  
(Janley deactivates the control device but the Dalek fires on the rebels.)  
VALMAR: I told you to cut the gun off!  
JANLEY: I did!  
VALMAR: You've killed our own people!  
VALMAR: We have to dismantle the gun, that's all.  
JANLEY: Oh, look at it!  
DALEK: Your usefulness is over.  
(A guard appears, firing at the Dalek.)  
JANLEY: Come on! Quick, Val. Come on!

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

POLLY: Doctor, it's stupid to hide in here!  
BEN: Well, do you fancy your chances outside in the corridor? No thanks.  
DOCTOR: The answer must be here somewhere.  
LESTERSON: Shh!  
(Hearing Daleks coming from the capsule, Lesterson hides everyone under the
workbench.)  
LESTERSON: You must be absolutely quiet. They know everything that's going on.
Everything! They even know what you're thinking.  
BEN: Where do they get their power from, Lesterson?  
LESTERSON: Ah, I tried to turn the power off, but they were miles ahead of me.
Marvellous creatures. You have to admire them.  
BEN: But we've got to stop them!  
LESTERSON: Oh, it's too late for that. They're the new species, you see,
taking over from homo sapiens. Man's had his day. Finished now.  
DALEK: The static circuit is nearly complete.  
DALEK 2: Soon we can abandon the power we are using.  
(Screams outside.)  
DALEK: The humans are being exterminated.  
(The two Daleks go into the capsule.)  
BEN: Did you hear that? They're going to use their own power.  
DOCTOR: The cables they laid. The trick I tried before won't work anymore.  
LESTERSON: Oh, if that's no good now, we're finished. All we can do is marvel
at the creatures who are taking our place.

**[Corridor]**

VALMAR: No!  
JANLEY: Come on!  
VALMAR: Don't be a fool.  
JANLEY: Come on!  
(Quinn pulls Valmar to safety as a Dalek appears ahead. Janley shoots at it,
but of course she dies.)

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

BEN: Take it easy, Polly.  
POLLY: Can't we do anything?! They're murdering everybody, one by one!  
BEN: You've done all this. Why'd you give them power in the first place?  
LESTERSON: Well, I could control it, you see. And then Janley got one of her
men, Valmar, I think it was, yes, and he rigged up a secret cable. It's
carrying power directly from the colony's supply.  
DOCTOR: Where? Where is it, Lesterson?  
LESTERSON: Valmar's the only one who can answer that. Or the Daleks of course.
They know everything. Yes, you should ask the Daleks.  
BEN: Then we must find Valmar.  
DOCTOR: No. You stay here and look after Polly. I'll go.  
MAN [OC]: Come on. This way. (scream)  
(The Doctor uses the diversion of two guards fighting a Dalek to get away down
the corridor. A woman tries to enter the lab, but is killed in the doorway.
Her companion tries to wrestle the Dalek, with the usual result.)

**[Corridor]**

(Valmar holds Janley's body, and cries.)  
QUINN: You'll have to leave her now, Valmar.  
VALMAR: She wasn't as bad as you think.  
DOCTOR: Valmar! Where is the Dalek power?  
QUINN: Get down, both of you!  
(As they play dead, a Dalek glides past them looking for signs of life, and
moves on.)  
DOCTOR: Valmar. Valmar! Where is the Dalek power supply?  
QUINN: We've got to stop them, Valmar. She's dead. There's nothing you can do
for her.  
VALMAR: The main cable's inside the capsule, but there's nothing you can do.  
QUINN: There must be some way of cutting off the power!  
DOCTOR: What makes you think I want to do that? We need more time. I know. A
diversion. Bragen's guards. We'll have to use them to keep the Daleks busy.
You go to Bragen.

**[Governor's office]**

BRAGEN: Section One, where's your report? Are you there, Section one? Section
two? Section two? Why don't they answer? Can you hear me, Section two? Section
three? Oh, why don't they answer? I'm their Governor. Why don't they answer?

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

(The colony is silent as the grave as the Daleks look for survivors.)  
BRAGEN [OC]: This is Bragen speaking. I'm speaking to the Daleks. Daleks,
listen to me. I am the Governor. You must work for me. Do not trust the
rebels. I will give you whatever you want, but immobilise your guns. This is
the Governor speaking.  
BEN: He's nuts, trying to talk to the Daleks.  
(More Daleks leave the capsule and go out into the corridor.)  
BEN: Lesterson, what's in that cupboard?  
LESTERSON: Nothing. It's quite empty.  
BEN: Well, come on, Polly, we'll be safe in there, love.  
(Ben and Polly hide in the cupboard while Lesterson stays underneath the
bench.)

**[Governor's office]**

BRAGEN: Do you hear me, Daleks?! You will obey my orders!  
QUINN: No use, Bragen. The Daleks have stopped obeying your orders.  
BRAGEN: Guards!  
QUINN: Dead! The Daleks have killed them. You still have your guard units in
the interior. How long will it take them to get here?  
BRAGEN: That depends.  
QUINN: Well, get them!  
BRAGEN: Well, they will be intercepted by the Daleks.  
QUINN: Exactly! It will draw them away from here and give the Doctor a chance
to deal with them.  
BRAGEN: I refuse to allow my guards to be sacrificed.  
QUINN: In that case the Daleks will destroy everything on this colony.  
(Bragen switches on the communications unit.)  
BRAGEN: Guards. This is Bragen speaking. All units will report immediately to
the capital. Be prepared to face the rebel Daleks. There. Are you satisfied?  
QUINN: I hope it works.

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

(The Doctor returns with Valmar.)  
DOCTOR: Ben! Polly!  
(Ben and Polly come out of the cupboard.)  
BEN: Doctor, did you hear what Bragen said?  
DOCTOR: Yes, I did.  
BEN: Well, I only hope the Daleks do go for the guards.  
POLLY: A lot of the Daleks went out just now.  
DOCTOR: Good, because we're going inside. Come on, Valmar.  
(The Doctor and Valmar go into the capsule and come out with a junction box
connected to a lot of cables.)  
DOCTOR: Ben, give us that spare cable over there. Polly, keep watch at the
door.  
BEN: Well, you know what you're doing?  
DOCTOR: Of course I do.  
BEN: Well, why can't you just take all the plugs out and cut the power off?  
DOCTOR: Because I prefer to do it my way!  
POLLY: Look out!  
(Everyone takes cover as a Dalek enters. Valmar goes into the capsule with the
modified junction box, just missing another Dalek coming out.)  
DALEK 2: Static power is being stored. We can dismantle the human electric
system.  
(The Doctor starts to edge his way round the room.)  
DALEK: The law of the Daleks is in force.  
DALEK 2: Extermination of humans.  
(Lesterson stands up.)  
DALEK: Our cables have been moved.  
LESTERSON: And I could tell you who did it.  
DALEK: What were you doing in there?  
LESTERSON: I want to help you.  
DALEK: Why?  
LESTERSON: (like a Dalek) I am your servant.  
DALEK: We do not need humans now.  
LESTERSON: Ah, but you wouldn't kill me. I gave you life.  
DALEK: Yes, you gave us life.  
(So the Dalek kills him. The Doctor plugs his cable into the generator.
Nothing happens. The Daleks spot Valmar and turn, while the Doctor pushes
every button in sight. Valmar gets through the door just before the Daleks
shoot. Ben pulls Polly out of sight. There's an explosion and the Doctor is
knocked down. The Daleks lose control, lights flashing and smoke coming from
their casings. One powers into the wall and the other bursts into flames.)

**[Colony]**

(Everywhere Daleks are affected by the power surge.)  
DALEK 2: There are two  
DALEK: Exterminate! Ah! Ah! Exterminate!  
(The corridors fill with smoke from exploding Daleks.)  
DALEK: Out of control! Out of Control!  
(In the capsule the machinery goes haywire and explosions rip through it.)

**[Governor's office]**

(A Dalek enters, but its dome blows off before it can shoot at them.)  
BRAGEN: What happened to it?  
QUINN: I don't know.  
BRAGEN: It seems that your friend, the Examiner, was successful after all.  
(Quinn relaxes, and Bragen gets the gun off him.)  
BRAGEN: Now I shall restore law and order on this planet.  
QUINN: Not your law, Bragen. That's finished for good.  
BRAGEN: You'll obey me, or  
QUINN: Your day is over, Bragen. No one will obey you now.  
BRAGEN: I'm still the Governor, and you will. Valmar!  
(A shot rings out, but it is Bragen who falls dead.)  
VALMAR: He was a murderer.  
QUINN: Enough of guns. There's a lot of clearing up to be done. We will
rebuild together. What is the extent of the damage?  
VALMAR: Oh, I don't know if its repairable. The whole electrical system.

**[Lesterson's laboratory]**

QUINN: Are you all right?  
BEN: Oh, he's okay. The clot knocked himself out.  
QUINN: It's a miracle. How did you do it?  
DOCTOR: Eh? What happened? What did I do? What did I do?  
BEN: You destroyed the Daleks, that's what you did.  
POLLY: No need to be modest about it.  
DOCTOR: Did I do that?  
POLLY: You know you did.  
VALMAR: You used the power from the colony's electric supply, overfed it and
blew up their temporary static circuit. Well, didn't you?  
DOCTOR: Did I do all that?  
VALMAR: You may have stopped the Daleks, but have you any idea of the damage
you've done to the colony?  
DOCTOR: Oh. There was a blow back, was there?  
VALMAR: A blow back? Our power supply has been destroyed! It'll be months
before we can get things back to normal.  
QUINN: Valmar!  
DOCTOR: Oh, that is unfortunate.  
VALMAR: But did it have to be this way?  
DOCTOR: I did a lot of damage, did I?  
QUINN: Come on.  
(Valmar and Quinn go to check the capsule.)  
DOCTOR: I think we'd better get out of here before they send us the bill.

**[Mercury swamp]**

(The Doctor and his companions walk to the Tardis. The Doctor is playing his
recorder.)  
BEN: Well, I mean I didn't expect the brass bands to be playing, but I
wouldn't have thought a thank you would have hurt anybody.  
POLLY: But Ben, think of all those poor people all killed.  
BEN: I know, but the Doctor saved the colony from being completely wiped out.  
POLLY: Hmm.  
BEN: Yeah, and he was telling them all along, but would they listen?  
POLLY: Mind you, he wasn't very convincing when he was trying to explain it to
Valmar and Quinn and everybody.  
BEN: No, he wasn't, was he?  
POLLY: Doctor, you did know what you were doing, didn't you?  
(The Doctor just chuckles and gives Polly a wink. There is a Dalek next to the
Tardis, its casing melted and scorched.)  
BEN: Oh, you needn't worry about them anymore, Doctor. Just a heap of old iron
now.  
(Ben taps the Dalek casing and they all go into the Tardis. Moments later it
dematerialises and the Dalek's eye-stalk lifts as if to watch.)  
  
---  
  
<Back to the episode listing

Doctor Who and related marks are trademarks of BBC . Copyright  1963,
Present. The web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment
purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

