

**The Wheel In Space**  
  
Original Airdate: 27 Apr, 1968  

__**Episode One**__

**[Tardis]**

JAMIE: We can't just leave her.  
DOCTOR: We're not leaving her, Jamie. It was her decision to stay. She'll be
perfectly all right with the Harrises. Now don't worry so much.  
JAMIE: I'm not, I'm just. Och, come on, let's go.  
DOCTOR: Well, where would you like to go?  
JAMIE: I couldn't care less.  
DOCTOR: I was fond of her too, you know, Jamie.  
(The Tardis dematerialises and Victoria's image fades from the screen. Later
in the flight, Jamie is dozing in a chair.)  
DOCTOR: Jamie, we're landing. Jamie!  
JAMIE: Huh?  
DOCTOR: We're landing!  
JAMIE: Oh.  
DOCTOR: Let's have a look at the scanner, shall we?  
(The scanner screen is blank.)  
JAMIE: I thought you said we'd landed?  
DOCTOR: Oh, yes, we are, but I seem to have lost the picture. Let's try a
little bit more power, shall we?  
JAMIE: Are you sure you're pushing the right one?  
DOCTOR: Yes, of course I am. Look at the fault indicator, will you? It's round
there on the left.  
JAMIE: No, it's all right here.  
DOCTOR: No movement at all?  
JAMIE: No.  
DOCTOR: Well, that's funny. The air's all right, the temperature's perfectly
normal. There seems to be rather a lot of metal all around us  
JAMIE: What? Oh, you know I can't hear you when you talk to yourself.  
DOCTOR: There we are, it's coming up now.  
(A beautiful lake appears on the scanner.)  
JAMIE: Hey, now that looks all right! Boy! Look at it. Hey, what's that?  
(It's an exotic animal.)  
JAMIE: The size of it.  
DOCTOR: Well, that's funny, it's changed to night now.  
JAMIE: It's a wee bit quick, isn't it? Look, it's changed again. What's going
on?  
DOCTOR: Oh dear. Those pictures aren't what's happening outside, I'm certain
of that.  
JAMIE: Why do they keep appearing then?  
DOCTOR: They're temptations.  
JAMIE: Eh?  
DOCTOR: The Tardis is trying to warn us to get away from here to somewhere
more pleasant. I must have pushed the wrong switch.  
JAMIE: The red light's stopped flashing.  
DOCTOR: What?  
JAMIE: Something must be wrong.  
DOCTOR: What? Well the power's overloading. The power lines are overloading!
(There's a flash.)  
DOCTOR: The fluid link's gone!  
JAMIE: Doctor, look under here.  
(A toxic gas is coming from the base of the console.)  
DOCTOR: The mercury's vapourising! We've got to get out of here, come on.  
JAMIE: But how?  
(The Doctor opens a small hatch beside the main doors to reveal a golden rod
with capped ends attached to a bracket.)  
DOCTOR: Hold on to me.  
JAMIE: What are you going to do?  
DOCTOR: Just hold on!  
(The Doctor grasps the rod and pulls it from its holder. The console room
walls shimmer and fold in on themselves. The doors are now open and the Doctor
and Jamie get out.)

**[Rocket motor section]**

(A cramped compartment.)  
JAMIE: Doctor, what's happened to the Tardis?  
DOCTOR: I disengaged the time vector generator.  
JAMIE: The what?  
DOCTOR: Well once removed, it alters the size of the Tardis. The inside
becomes an ordinary telephone box again. Come along, come and sit over here.  
(The Doctor still has the rod, and Jamie is coughing a lot.)  
DOCTOR: If I hadn't have done, the mercury vapour would have killed us.  
JAMIE: Where are we?  
DOCTOR: It looks like the motor section of some sort of rocket.  
JAMIE: A rocket?  
DOCTOR: Oh, yes. There's an artificial gravity system, too.  
JAMIE: What does that do?  
DOCTOR: Well, it's what keeps us on our feet, otherwise we'd be floating
around.  
JAMIE: Oh. There's no water around, is there?  
DOCTOR: Water, no. Not in here, Jamie. There's no movement either, is there.  
JAMIE: We're on the ground, then.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I expect so. Ouch!  
JAMIE: What's the matter? Well, don't keep me in suspense, what's happened?  
(The Doctor pulls out a paper bag out of his pocket.)  
DOCTOR: Have a lemon sherbet. It'll quench your thirst.  
(The Doctor goes to examine the door of the compartment.)  
JAMIE: Doctor, the warning mechanism obviously thought there was something
wrong out here, but what? I mean, everything's so, well, dead, isn't it?  
DOCTOR: Jamie.  
JAMIE: What?  
DOCTOR: Look. It's a track.  
(There are marks on the floor leading under the door.)  
DOCTOR: Why, that's oil. It must be some sort of machine. It's recent, too.  
JAMIE: Well, I wonder what that would (Jamie presses a button and the door
opens.)  
JAMIE: I just. Oh.

**[Corridor]**

(It is an empty corridor. They follow the track past two other doorways before
reaching a blank metal shutter at the far end. There are controls and a
monitor screen in the wall nearby.)  
JAMIE: Shall we open the door?  
DOCTOR: No. No, there may be something on the other side. Here.  
(The Doctor looks at the monitor controls and flicks a switch.)  
DOCTOR: Here we are.  
(The image of a shadow-filled control room appears on the screen. It is filled
with banks of computers and control panels, but there are no people visible.
There is a small coffin-shaped pod next to an airlock, with a large metal
crate on the other side.)  
JAMIE: Looks safe enough.  
DOCTOR: Yes. What caused the defence mechanism of the Tardis to register
danger then? And where's the crew? And what's this track? There's plenty of
air in there. Let's try and get in.  
(The door won't open.)  
JAMIE: Oh. I'll look up here then.  
(Jamie goes back to the first of the two doors and opens it. There's nothing
interesting inside so he closes it and goes to the other one.)  
JAMIE: Stores in that one.  
DOCTOR: It's living quarters here.

**[Rocket living quarters]**

(The door closes behind them. There is a bunk bed and a dispensing machine,
table and two chairs.)  
JAMIE: Ah. Water!  
(Meanwhile, in the control room, a squat, squared-off robot comes out of the
shadow. It has two short stubby arms and protruding antennae, and illuminated
detectors instead of a face. It communicates electronically with the rocket's
systems. The door opens and the robot looks out. It sees nothing and the door
closes again.)  
JAMIE: I'd have thought a rocket this size would have carried more than two
people.  
DOCTOR: Yes, Jamie, it does. It carries four. Two on duty and two resting.  
JAMIE: Oh, the Tardis must have gone mad, then. I mean, there's nothing on
board here, so there's no danger.  
DOCTOR: Isn't there?  
(The Doctor looks through a porthole.)  
DOCTOR: We're just drifting, Jamie. Drifting aimlessly in space. Perhaps
that's what the Tardis was trying to warn us about.  
JAMIE: What's it matter?  
DOCTOR: Matter? We're just a piece of space flotsam, don't you realise that?  
JAMIE: Well all right, stick your rod dimen  
DOCTOR: Time vector generator.  
JAMIE: Aye, stick it back in, and we'll float off somewhere else.  
DOCTOR: No, it's not as simple as that, Jamie. The fluid, hmm? We need mercury
to refill it, don't we.  
JAMIE: Well there must be some on board here, surely?  
DOCTOR: Yes, I hope so.  
JAMIE: Well there's got to be.  
DOCTOR: What's happened to the crew? They haven't just gone out for a little
constitutional, you know.  
JAMIE: Well, we won't find that out till we look inside that control room,
will we?  
(In the control room, a three-handed clock is running. The numeric display
above reads 10,025 and falling.)

**[Rocket motor section]**

(The Doctor and Jamie have searched the ship.)  
DOCTOR: Well, I've searched my side. There's not a drop of mercury anywhere.  
JAMIE: Me, too. No, the only place we haven't searched is that control room.  
DOCTOR: Well, we'll have a breather, and then we'll try in there.  
JAMIE: And perhaps we'll find some food in that machine as well.  
DOCTOR: I can give you another lemon drop.  
JAMIE: Something a bit more substantial, please.  
DOCTOR: What do you fancy?  
JAMIE: Well right now I'd like a nice plate of roast beef with all the
trimmings.  
DOCTOR: I'll see what I can do.  
JAMIE: Eh? Ah now Doctor, where are you going to find a plate of roast beef on
this place?

**[Rocket living quarters]**

(The Doctor works the dispensing machine controls.)  
JAMIE: What are you doing?  
DOCTOR: Roast beef, you said?  
JAMIE: Well, yes.  
DOCTOR: What vegetables?  
JAMIE: Potatoes  
DOCTOR: Potatoes.  
JAMIE: And cabbage.  
DOCTOR: And cabbage. What about a drop of fruit salad?  
JAMIE: Fruit salad, yes.  
DOCTOR: And I'll have some pork, potatoes and carrots. And, I'll have a drop
of ice-cream.  
(Two paper plates appear, with white cubes on them.)  
DOCTOR: There we are. what about the gravy?  
JAMIE: I don't think so.  
DOCTOR: Gravy.  
JAMIE: Am I supposed to eat this?  
DOCTOR: Yes, of course. It'll be delicious.  
JAMIE: I've heard of a square meal, but this is ridiculous.  
DOCTOR: Sit down and eat up.  
JAMIE: Doctor, what do you think Victoria's doing now?  
DOCTOR: Now? Time is relative, Jamie. If I knew when 'now' was, I might be
able to hazard a guess.  
JAMIE: You know what I mean.  
DOCTOR: Well, she's decided to stay in a good historical period. Very few
wars, great prosperity. She'll be happy enough. This is very filling, isn't
it?  
JAMIE: Aye. Well, what do we do now?  
DOCTOR: Well, when we've digested our dinner we'll have another try to get
into the control room.  
JAMIE: Oh well, while you do that, I'm going to have a wee lie down.  
(Jamie stretches out on the bunk.)  
JAMIE: Tell me, though. What do you think happened to the crew?  
DOCTOR: I don't know, Jamie. I wish I did. I suppose they've been overtaken by
some disaster or other. Perhaps we'll find out when we get into the control
room. (The control room door opens and the little robot comes out and goes to
the open door of the motor section. It is quite slow, and is constantly taking
readings of its surroundings. The Doctor is using his pocket telescope to look
out of the porthole.)  
DOCTOR: Well, at least we don't seem to be in any immediate danger, Jamie. But
I would like to know  
(Jamie is fast asleep.)  
(The servo-robot has reached the Tardis. In the control room, the countdown
reads 1,000. A light flashes on the robot's casing. It goes into the corridor
and laser-welds the motor section door shut, then returns to the control room.
After listening at the cabin door, the Doctor opens it and looks into the
corridor. He sees a fresh set of oily tracks on the floor and follows them to
the control room door. There he turns on the wall monitor, but it is full of
static. Inside, the robot connects itself to a computer bank and the rocket
begins to turn. The Doctor is thrown against a wall by the movement. Jamie is
tipped from the bunk, and goes to find the Doctor.)

**[Corridor]**

JAMIE: Doctor, what's happening?  
DOCTOR: I hit my head. Oh!  
JAMIE: We're moving. The rocket's moving.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I know. There's someone in the control room.  
JAMIE: Let's have a look.  
DOCTOR: No, no, Jamie. We've got to get back to the Tardis. It's the only safe
place.  
JAMIE: Doctor, the mercury stuff.  
DOCTOR: Never mind that.  
(Jamie helps the groggy Doctor stand up and go to the motor section door.)  
JAMIE: It won't open. Doctor, someone's sealed the door.  
(The Doctor collapses. Jamie helps him up and into the cabin.)

**[Rocket living quarters]**

DOCTOR: Lock it, Jamie. Lock it.  
JAMIE: Easy. Doctor, are you all right? Doctor?  
(The Doctor has collapses onto the bunk.)  
(In the control room, the robot disconnects from the computer and goes to the
pod by the airlock. They exchange electronic signals then the pod opens to
reveal a row of small white spheres. The inner and outer airlock doors open
and the room depressurises. The countdown has reached Zero. The spheres float
out through the airlock into space. The airlock closes and the robot
repressurises the control room, then goes to a large monitor screen which now
shows a large space station. Its top section is flattened, like a large wheel,
with a complicated lattice of rocket motors and antennae below. The robot
reconnects to the computer and the rocket stops.) JAMIE: Doctor, there's a
great big silver thing out here.  
DOCTOR: Into the Tardis. I've got to get him to safety.  
(Jamie is looking out of the porthole as the Doctor crawls into the corridor,
takes a cap off one end of the time vector generator and points it at the
sealed motor section door. A beam vapourises the seal. When he has finished,
the Doctor puts the cap back on the TVG and puts the device in his pocket.
Before he can open the door, he is aware of the robot right behind him.)  
JAMIE: Doctor, you must see this.

**[Corridor]**

(Jamie looks out of the cabin to see the robot. He grabs the metallic blanket
from the bunk and throws it over the machine, which skitters away, blind.)  
JAMIE: Back to the cabin, quick!

**[Rocket living quarters]**

JAMIE: Easy. Easy now.  
(Outside, the robot blows the blanket off with a jet of air and heads for the
cabin.)  
DOCTOR: Jamie, take this. It's a gun. Like a torch. You have to be careful.  
(He gives Jamie the TVG as the robot's laser begins to burn through the cabin
door. Carefully, Jamie unscrews the tip of the rod and aims it at the door.
The beam hits the robot, sending it flying down to the door of the motor
section where it explodes.)  
JAMIE: Oh. We're all right for the time being. But listen, you. Mo more
gallivanting about till I say so, all right? Doctor? Doctor?  
(The Doctor is unconscious.)

**[Wheel Operations room]**

(Everyone is gathered around a man at a radio control console. He is Leo Ryan,
Communications Officer.)  
RYAN: (Australian) Hold. Get a fix on that.  
CORWYN: It's not moving now.  
(Gemma Corwyn, Medical Officer.)  
LERNOV: Crossover zero.  
(Tanya Lernov, Russian.)  
RYAN: Triangulate it, Rico. How's it now. Tanya?  
CORWYN: The same.  
LERNOV: Just a slight drift.  
RYAN: No, no the movement isn't real, it's just an illusion caused by slight
polar precession.  
(An older man, Commander Jarvis Bennett, enters.)  
BENNETT: How's our mystery rocket?  
CORWYN: Suddenly lifeless.  
RYAN: Doesn't make sense, sir. It must have been driven by something.  
CORWYN: No radio contact.  
BENNETT: I'm not surprised. I've just checked out its description on the
register. It's a Phoenix Mark Four named Silver Carrier.  
RYAN: Tanya?  
LERNOV: The register's even. No crossover reading now.  
RYAN: No, it's definitely stopped moving.  
CORWYN: Silver Carrier?  
BENNETT: Supply ship for Station Five. Reported overdue nine weeks ago. It's
only about eighty or ninety million miles off course.  
RYAN: Try radio contact again, Rico.  
CASALI: Okay.  
(Enrico Casali.)  
CASALI: Station Three to Silver Carrier. Station Three to Silver Carrier. Call
sign LX88J. Repeat, LX88J. Come in, please. Nothing.  
CORWYN: It couldn't have drifted all that way, Jarvis.  
BENNETT: No, it couldn't.  
LERNOV: Try the emergency again, Leo?  
RYAN: Station Three to Silver Carrier. Pull switch with red band to operate
emergency transmitter.  
CORWYN: You think their radio's gone?  
LERNOV: In case.  
BENNETT: Good procedure. I'm afraid we're wasting our time, but waste it we
must.  
RYAN: Any reaction, Tanya?  
LERNOV: No, nothing. No movement at all.  
CORWYN: How does Silver Carrier turn up in this part of the cosmos?  
BENNETT: Something happens to the crew. One of them puts on the automatic. The
rocket's travelled so far now, the power feedback to automatic is probably
failing.  
RYAN: Yes, that's possible.  
BENNETT: It could start up and start moving again at any minute.  
CORWYN: And the crew?  
BENNETT: A dozen and one things.  
RYAN: Well, we've tried everything, sir. We can't raise a sound.  
BENNETT: Trouble is, if I'm right about that automatic, and I think I am, that
rocket could suddenly accelerate and whip straight towards us. There can't be
any life on board there, can there?)  
(Meanwhile the spheres drift further from the rocket and straight for the
Wheel.)  
LERNOV: I'm getting something. Like small meteorites hitting our outer rim.  
(The spheres are landing on the Wheel and being absorbed into the hull.)  
LERNOV: There's another drop in air pressure.  
CORWYN: It can't be meteorites, we'd have had some warning.  
LERNOV: Well, something. Look. Jumping all over the place.  
BENNETT: It's obvious. We must take it some minor objects have escaped from
the Silver Carrier. Objects of small mass and high density.  
CORWYN: Then these objects would be clinging close to the rocket, Jarvis, not
descending on us.  
BENNETT: It doesn't matter, Gemma, it really doesn't. Don't start looking for
mysteries. Now I can't risk that rocket homing on this station.  
CORWYN: What are you going to do?  
BENNETT: In a few moments, you're going to experience a sight rarely seen by
human beings. Leo, is that projector on standby?  
RYAN: Yes, sir. Moving into position now.  
CORWYN: Jarvis, what are you going to do?  
BENNETT: Turn the X-ray laser on the Silver Carrier. In a few moments you're
going to witness the complete destruction of a rocket in space.  

__**Episode Two**__

**[Wheel Operations room]**

CASALI: On Red band emergency frequency, come in, please. Come in, please.
Station Three to Silver Carrier, Station Three to Silver Carrier. On Red band
emergency frequency, come in please.  
BENNETT: All ready, Leo?  
RYAN: Yes, sir. It's locked on now.  
BENNETT: That's it. Don't get much fun, do we? Better make the most of it.  
RYAN: Make a change from blasting meteorites, wouldn't it?  
CORWYN: Jarvis?  
BENNETT: Hold it a minute. Tanya, can we take a visual recording of it?  
LERNOV: Yes sir, can do.  
RYAN: Still no movement or radio ,signals sir.  
BENNETT: Put up the anti-magnetic shield, Leo, when I give the word.  
RYAN: Right.  
CASALI: Still going to plan, sir.  
BENNETT: Good, I'll do an announcement about reverberations.  
CORWYN: Before you do that, Jarvis, can I have a word? It's important.  
CASALI: More bogeys.  
(Corwyn and Bennett move away.)  
RYAN: All systems on green. Stand by.  
ALL: Green. Stand by.  
LERNOV: I don't know what you grinning about.  
RYAN: Neither do I.  
LERNOV: It isn't funny, Leo. The Controller's like a kid with a new toy.  
RYAN: Oh, don't tell me you're going to be a old stick in the mud, too?  
LERNOV: If you are referring to Doctor Corwyn, she is known. She is no stick
in the mud. She's perfectly right to be cautious.  
RYAN: Come on, Tanya. It's off course about eighty million miles. I mean,
there can't possibly be anyone alive on the thing.  
(On the Silver Carrier, Jamie is trying to shine a signal light out of the
cabin porthole. He pulls the light to far and the cable comes out, putting the
room into darkness. He sees a small glow by the Doctor. It is the Time Vector
Generator. Jamie holds it up to the porthole.)

**[Corwyn's office]**

CORWYN: Yes, I know all that, Jarvis, but we still can't be absolutely
certain.  
BENNETT: Gemma, one thing that I beg of you. Don't subject me to
psychoanalysis. You think I'm having a whale of a time, don't you? All kids
again. Bang, bang, blow up the balloon. You're wrong, you know.  
CORWYN: Am I?  
BENNETT: Say what you like, the Silver Carrier is a menace to the Wheel. Now
surely you can see that?  
CORWYN: If you equate menace with automatic power drive, I don't.  
BENNETT: What else?  
CORWYN: You want me to believe some emergency happened on the Silver Carrier.
The pilot switched to automatic and then tragedy.  
BENNETT: Right.  
CORWYN: And all the crew died?  
BENNETT: Right again.  
CORWYN: Where was the Carrier bound for, Jarvis?  
BENNETT: Servicing Station Five. I told you.  
CORWYN: Then isn't it be reasonable to assume that the automatic would have
taken it to Station Five?  
BENNETT: Yes, that's good reasoning. But you're forgetting the emergency. That
could have damaged the control sensors. In fact, it must have done, which is
why the rocket is so far off course.  
CORWYN: Assumption again, guesswork. It would be so easy to check.  
BENNETT: We can't risk that rocket turning in on us. Don't you see? It'd blast
a hole right through us!  
(Jamie takes the cap off the TVG.)

**[Wheel Operations room]**

(The Radio operator rips his headphones off in pain.)  
RYAN: What the matter?  
RUDKIN: Noise! Fantastic noise through my headphones.  
LERNOV: Leo! The approach indicators are all at red!  
RYAN: What's causing it? Green system's gone crazy. Tanya, get Doctor Corwyn.
Check emergency system yellow.  
CASALI: Emergency yellow, negative.  
WOMAN: Transfer internal communications to my cell.  
RYAN: Bill!  
DUGGAN: Yo!  
RYAN: Will you lie him down there?  
CASALI: Hey, hey, hey, you don't want to do that again.  
RYAN: Hey, listen!  
(The interference can be heard coming through the headsets.)

**[Corwyn's office]**

BENNETT: Don't argue with me, Gemma. The decision is mine! This station and
the people on it are my responsibility.  
LERNOV: Rudkin's hurt!  
CORWYN: What happened?  
LERNOV: Colossal static pulses swamping the detectors.  
BENNETT: It's the rocket. I knew it was a menace. (Jamie uses the cap of the
TVG to create a pulsed signal.)

**[Wheel Operations room]**

(Bennett, Corwyn and Lernov enter.)  
BENNETT: All right, Tanya, get back to the complex. See if you can pin this
static down.  
BENNETT: Vallance, Casali, here. Well?  
CORWYN: It's bad.  
BENNETT: Can we move him?  
CORWYN: Yes.  
BENNETT: Right. You two, take him to the Medical Bay.  
CORWYN: Gently with him, now.  
(Rudkin is carried out.)  
BENNETT: Your attention. That rocket has given us enough trouble. Bill, knock
it out.  
DUGGAN: Right, sir.  
LERNOV: Controller!  
BENNETT: Yes, what is it?  
LERNOV: The static. There's a signal on it.  
BENNETT: There can't be.  
RYAN: You're right, Tanya. Get me a fix on that.  
LERNOV: If I can. It's not any code that I've ever heard before but there's
definitely a repetitive order to it.  
RYAN: It's no good using radio or radar. We will have to use millimicron
waves.  
BENNETT: You think it's coming from the rocket?  
RYAN: Just want to make sure that it's not coming from anywhere else.  
LERNOV: The rocket. It is!  
BENNETT: You're sure?  
LERNOV: Certain. I was fixed on it anyway. There's no doubt.  
BENNETT: Then somebody is on board. Phil!  
PHIL: Sir.  
BENNETT: I want two men to cross over. Organise it, will you?  
PHIL: Right sir.  
BENNETT: Eighty million miles off course. If they're alive on board that
craft, they must be in a pretty bad way.

**[Silver Carrier]**

(After a little while, Jamie stops signalling and checks on the Doctor. He is
still unconscious, so he returns to the porthole to see a space-suited figure
looking in. The newcomer gestures towards the front of the rocket. Jamie goes
to the control room but the door is locked. Two men have already entered
through the airlock. They repressurise the control room and the door opens.)  
JAMIE: Quick, I've somebody injured in here.

**[Wheel Operations room]**

(Laleham, an American, has taken over as radio operator.)  
LALEHAM: Voyager five, call sign K-1 2 10-Q. Confirm please, Station 3.  
VOICE [OC]: Receiving you, Station 3. Hello, hello?  
LALEHAM: Light to medium meteorite storm across your planned route between
thirteen hundred fourteen hundred hours. Coordinates: A alpha 2710 point 4, B
beta 4 point 7. Do you receive Voyager Five?  
VOICE [OC]: Yes, thank you for the information, Station 3.  
LALEHAM: We have computed an alternative route for you, Voyager Five. Stand by
for instructions.  
VOICE [OC]: Computer standing by now.  
RYAN: How are the guests?  
LERNOV: Doctor Corwyn's examining the older one now. They're both slightly in
shock anyway.  
RYAN: What's the story?  
LERNOV: I don't know. Quite a mystery, isn't it.  
RYAN: Jarvis won't like that. What that on green system three, Chang?  
CHANG: (Oriental) Very odd, sir. Been getting one or two funny signs here and
there all the time. Soon as you check them out they vanish.  
RYAN: Put them in the log, okay?  
CHANG: Yes, sir. It as if a number of magnets were touching the outer skin of
the wheel and then letting go. Localised field effects, that's all.  
MAN: All detector fields are checked out, sir. Can't be anything serious.  
RYAN: Well, keep a log and let me know.  
MAN: Right, sir.  
RYAN: More mysteries.  
LERNOV: I know.  
RYAN: Something else worrying you, Tanya?  
LERNOV: What about those sudden drops in air pressure levels? They were small
enough and soon adjust themselves but I didn't like it.  
RYAN: How small?  
LERNOV: Only a few millimetres. One degree, sometimes one and a half.  
RYAN: Hmm. Some fault in the air supply unit, or the pumps.  
LERNOV: In so many different parts of the Wheel?  
RYAN: Did you tell Jarvis?  
LERNOV: Of course. He bit my head off.  
RYAN: And have you told Gemma Corwyn yet?  
LERNOV: No, she was busy with the new arrivals. I didn't like to disturb her.  
RYAN: Well, if I were you Tanya, I start a check on the whole air supply unit.  
LERNOV: That's what I thought. Leo?  
RYAN: Hmm?  
LERNOV: None of these things. Your system showing temporary faults, the air
pressure levels. Well, they all started with the rocket, didn't they?  
RYAN: What, you think there are little green men on board, do you?  
LERNOV: Well, the two they bought back wasn't exactly normal, were they?  
RYAN: Well, I tell you what, hey? If you get scared, I'll let you hold my
hand. Okay?  
LERNOV: I'm serious.  
RYAN: So am I.  
(More of the spheres from the rocket are getting through the outer hull of the
wheel.)

**[Medical rest room]**

(Jamie is baring his chest for a check-up.)  
CORWYN: Breathe in again. Out. In again please. Out. Now, I want you to take a
deep breath and exhale as slowly as you can. Good. You can dress now.  
JAMIE: How about the Doctor?  
CORWYN: Concussion, certainly. I am waiting for the X-Rays to see if there's
any fracture. What were you both up to?  
JAMIE: Hey?  
CORWYN: Fancy dress or something? Your clothes.  
JAMIE: Look, have you ever thought what you look like walking down the street
in those things. People would think you were a wee bit strange as well.  
CORWYN: I dare say. But I don't understand the analogy. We're both in space.
It's you and your friend who aren't conforming to custom.  
JAMIE: How about the medical? Do I pass?  
CORWYN: You'll do. If it's any comfort to you, you are in fine physical shape.
Can you give me your full name please? JAMIE: James Robert McCrimmon. Jamie.  
CORWYN: Thank you. And your friend?  
JAMIE: Er, the Doctor.  
CORWYN: I can't put that down.  
JAMIE: Er. John Smith.  
CORWYN: Really?  
JAMIE: Aye.  
(Corwyn sees that her medical equipment was manufactured by John Smith and
Associates.)  
CORWYN: Doctor John Smith.  
JAMIE: They must be a lot of them about.  
CORWYN: I dare say. You were passengers aboard the Silver Carrier, were you?  
JAMIE: Er, do you think that I could have a drink of water, please?  
CORWYN: What happened to the crew?  
JAMIE: I don't know.  
CORWYN: Could you go further than that?  
JAMIE: Well, I was ill in the cabin, you see. A terrible fever. Raving for
days. Well, when I came to, the door was closed against us, the Doctor was
hurt and your people came.  
CORWYN: All the communicating doors were closed against you?  
JAMIE: Aye.  
CORWYN: And your friend didn't tell you what happened?  
JAMIE: No.  
CORWYN: All right, Jamie, that'll do for the present. The Controller will want
to have a chat with you. We'll have to get you home somehow.  
JAMIE: Aye, that'll be the day. Oh, of course.  
CORWYN: There should be another ship passing through in a week or two.  
JAMIE: Oh, can I go now?  
CORWYN: You didn't drink your water.  
JAMIE: No, well, that's all right.  
CORWYN: Wait a moment.  
JAMIE: What?  
CORWYN: Would you like to see over the Wheel? I could arrange it for you, if
you like.  
JAMIE: Oh, yes. I mean, there's nothing else to do.  
CORWYN: Well, if you go along the corridor you'll see a door marked
Parapsychology library.  
JAMIE: Para what?  
CORWYN: It's on the other side of the Wheel complex, about eight sections on.
I'll tell Zoe to show you round.  
JAMIE: Zoe?  
CORWYN: She's our. Well, the best way to describe her would be to call her our
librarian.  
JAMIE: Zoe, you say?  
CORWYN: That's right.  
JAMIE: Oh, you will tell me what happens to the Doctor.  
CORWYN: Yes, of course.  
JAMIE: Thank you.  
(Jamie leaves. Corwyn turns on a monitor.)  
CORWYN: Parapsychology library, Doctor Corwyn calling.  
(A young dark-haired girl answers.)  
ZOE [on monitor]: Parapsychology library. What reference do you require,
Doctor Corwyn?  
CORWYN: No reference, thank you, Zoe. I need your help in another way.  
ZOE [on monitor]: Oh?  
CORWYN: One of the people retrieved from the rogue spaceship is coming to your
section. I'd like you to show him over the Wheel and observe him.  
ZOE [on monitor]: Observe him?  
CORWYN: Discreetly, of course.  
ZOE [on monitor]: Do you want these observations recorded?  
CORWYN: Yes, please.  
ZOE [on monitor]: Hmm, should be interesting. Any facts known?  
CORWYN: Yes. He is a nice lad. His name's Ja  
ZOE [on monitor]: Just a minute. Sorry, I was halfway through a RNA analysis
when you came on. Right.  
(Jamie is walking along the corridor looking for a long and complex word on a
door. He finds one and pushes the door open)

**[Parapsychology library]**

(It is dominated by a large circular desk with Zoe is seated in the middle.)  
ZOE: With the exception of the Hercules cluster. Confirmation of the
information received that one of the stars in the Messier 13 group is entering
a nova phase. This will be a repetition of the phenomenon observed in the
Perseus cluster last week. Information of the gamma radiation level is
available.  
(Zoe turns off the recorder.)  
ZOE: Sorry. You must be (laughs)  
JAMIE: What are you laughing at?  
ZOE: Your clothes. You're wearing female garments.  
JAMIE: Female? Look, I'll have you know this is a kilt. Have you not seen it
before?  
ZOE: Kilt? Kilt. A barbaric form of garment as worn by a kiltie! Are you of
Scandinavian origin? Danish?  
JAMIE: No, I am not. I am a true bred Scot and I'll just thank you to  
ZOE: Oh, a Scot. Scotland, of course. Pre-century history isn't my field, you
see.  
JAMIE: Aye, maybe not, but just you watch your lip or I'll put you across my
knee and larrup you.  
ZOE: Oh, this is going to be fun. I shall learn a lot from you. Come on, James
Robert McCrimmon. Do you know anything about interstellar flora?  
JAMIE: Eh?

**[Power room]**

(They meet Bill Duggan.)  
DUGGAN: And this is my little kingdom. Hey, how do you like the Greenhouse?  
JAMIE: Do you collect these?  
DUGGAN: No, they're floating seeds. The only place they flourish is down here
in the power room. Of course, the old man kicked up a mad dust storm at first,
but Doc Corwyn said it was good psychology or something. Anyway, I just like
flowers. Hey, that one comes all the way from Venus. Can you imagine that? All
those millions of miles away.  
ZOE: 24,564,000 miles at perihelion and 161,350,000 miles at aphelion.  
JAMIE: Oh, I was dying to know that.  
DUGGAN: And this is the capacitator bank for the x-ray lasers.  
JAMIE: The what?  
DUGGAN: Oh, it controls the laser gun. Without it the gun's useless.  
JAMIE: What do you need a gun for up in space anyway?  
DUGGAN: Self-defence. We can blot out any attacker up to ten thousand miles in
any one direction. Good eh?  
JAMIE: Reassuring.  
DUGGAN: Yeah, and they're the anti-magnetic field generators. They can vend
off even a medium-sized meteorite up to fifty miles.  
JAMIE: You know, Bill, the Doctor'll love all this.  
ZOE: This Doctor friend of yours. Is he a scientist?  
JAMIE: He is in a way, I suppose, yes.  
ZOE: What's his specialty?  
JAMIE: He's what?  
ZOE: Well, is he a physicist, biochemist, astronomer, biometrician  
JAMIE: Yes, he is.  
DUGGAN: Well, he certainly sounds a interesting character, this Doctor friend
of yours. When is he going to be up and about?

**[Corwyn's office]**

CORWYN: If he is just suffering from concussion, not too long.  
BENNETT: Oh, it doesn't tell me much. I want facts.  
CORWYN: I don't blame you.  
BENNETT: We're landed with a couple of strays. Panic, mysteries from the crew.
The routine's getting shoddy and I don't like it.  
CORWYN: What panics?  
BENNETT: Oh, nothing, nothing. I'll tell you if it gets serious. People are
just edgy. Out in space, human beings have got to rely on routines,
ordinariness. Confuse them and you got trouble.  
CORWYN: Yes.  
BENNETT: I'm used to emergencies. Trained in them. But these things? I don't
know  
CORWYN: What you call mysteries?  
BENNETT: Exactly, exactly. I don't want to know, Gemma. I don't want to know.
Well, you see.  
CORWYN: You'd better hear my preliminary report on the boy.  
BENNETT: Yes, go ahead.  
CORWYN: He's lying. Not completely and apparently reluctantly. He's very fit
both mentally and physically, nice constructive personality. His blood
pressure suggests he's not been in space very long.  
BENNETT: Lies about what?  
CORWYN: He said he had fever aboard the Silver Carrier. He hadn't. His gamma
globulins are normal.  
BENNETT: Oh? Why should he lie about that?  
CORWYN: I asked him what happened to the crew. Fever was his excuse for not
knowing. And then again he lied. At least, I almost sure he lied about his
friend's name. John Smith, he called him.  
BENNETT: Well, they do exist, you know.  
CORWYN: Yes, he was looking at that for long enough. Coincidence possibly.
Somehow I doubt it. And then, what's the most precious thing in deep space,
Jarvis?  
BENNETT: Air, water, take your pick.  
CORWYN: Exactly. In space training even for one journey travellers. He asked
me for a drink of water and then he left it. He might have been on Earth. That
boy's has no space travel training, Jarvis. He's probably a stowaway, or he
may be an agent.  
BENNETT: Sabotage?  
CORWYN: Plenty of people on Earth think we should suspend the space programme.
Some of them have forced their opinions already.  
BENNETT: Do you think these two could have stowed away somehow, even disposed
of the crew of the Silver Carrier, pretended to drift here helplessly, we take
them in and they start breaking things up?  
CORWYN: I don't go that far.  
BENNETT: Well of course, it's fits! Everything fits!  
CORWYN: I only suggested it as a possibility, Jarvis. There are others.  
BENNETT: We'll talk about those later. This could be serious.  
CORWYN: Jarvis, wait. I

**[Wheel Operations room]**

ZOE: And this is the Operations and Communications room.  
JAMIE: What does this Wheel thing do up here anyway?  
ZOE: Well, it has varied functions, but mainly it's a radio-visual relay for
Earth, a half-way house for deep space ships, a space research station,
stellar early warning station for all types of space phenomena and  
JAMIE: Aye, well, ask a silly question.  
ZOE: Not there. That's the Controller's chair.  
RYAN: Hey, you're in for quite a treat.  
JAMIE: I am?  
DUGGAN: The old man's going ahead then?  
RYAN: Too right he is.  
LERNOV: I thought Gemma talked him out of it.  
RYAN: No, only because she thought there might still be somebody on board.
Just as well for you.  
JAMIE: I'm sorry, I lost you in the first part.  
ZOE: The Controller, Jarvis Bennett, wanted to destroy the rocket.  
LERNOV: And then we got your message.  
RYAN: Only minutes in it too. The laser was all primed and ready to blast.  
LERNOV: Has Jarvis given the go-ahead?  
RYAN: Yes, I've run a new co-ordinate fix. Everything's programmed and ready.
All we need now is the final signal.  
JAMIE: Oh, you're not going to blow up the rocket, then?  
RYAN: Well, it might hit us, so to be on the safe side we blast it out of
existence.  
LERNOV: Jarvis asked me to make a visual recording of it. I'd better re-
position. Zoe, help me do a quick mental calculation, would you? You're
quicker than me.  
RYAN: It'll be great to see this at leisure. It should be quite an explosion.  
LERNOV: Right, Zoe? Lineal reading is 198.42 metres at 23 degrees latitude.
190.03 metres. 24 degree latitude.  
(Jamie leaves quietly and goes back to the power room. There he finds the
x-ray laser's capacitator bank, but doesn't notice some small twisted pieces
of metal on the floor. Jamie searches a shelf of bottles and canisters.)

**[Wheel Operations room]**

BENNETT: But he was definitely here?  
ZOE: Yes, he just vanished.  
BENNETT: Bill, any ideas?  
DUGGAN: No, sir. He was here with us. We were showing him around.  
BENNETT: Where?  
DUGGAN: Well, the power house  
BENNETT: The power house.  
DUGGAN: Yes, sir.  
BENNETT: Look, Bill, not a word to the others. Just follow me in a moment or
two. Zoe, not a word.  
ZOE: Right, sir.  
(Bennett leaves.)  
RYAN: Don't look at me, I don't know what's going on.  
LERNOV: Problems?  
RYAN: I don't know.  
DUGGAN: It's all in the mind, dear, it's all in the mind. I'll see you.  
(Duggan leaves.)  
LERNOV: What was the Controller talking to Bill Duggan about, Zoe?  
ZOE: Nothing important. At least I don't think so. I don't know. Does it
matter? (Zoe leaves.)  
RYAN: Hey, what's all the whispering about?  
LERNOV: I wish I knew. Leo, did I ever tell you about my nose?  
RYAN: Your nose?  
LERNOV: Yes. It's like a barometer. It never lets me down.  
RYAN: Oh.  
LERNOV: I smell trouble.  
RYAN: Can you pin point it?  
LERNOV: Hmm. It's something to do with that rocket out there. There's
something sinister about it.

**[Rocket control room]**

(Two larger egg-like spheres are in a corner. The clock is counting up this
time. Suddenly, power cables spring to life, taking power from the consoles.
The spheres begin to grow, their skins glowing and becoming translucent to
reveal a humanoid shape curled up inside. One of the spheres bursts open to
reveal a silver three-fingered fist.)

__**Episode Three**__

_(From the Lost in Time DVD)_

**[Wheel Operations room]**

(Silver Carrier is on the monitor.)  
LERNOV: My nose never lets me down.  
RYAN: Well, don't overwork it, eh? I mean, it's rather pretty. Too much
exercise might damage its shape.  
LERNOV: If something happens, don't say I didn't warn you. That's rocket
dangerous.  
RYAN: Nah, not for long. As soon as Jarvis gives the word, the laser'll blast
it out of existence.

**[Power room]**

(Jamie spots a spray labelled Quick-set plastic on a shelf. He takes it to the
capacitator, pulls a section out and sprays the stuff on it before pushing it
back. The machine slows down. Then he is grabbed before he can do it to
another piece of the machine.)  
BENNETT: Red-handed.  
JAMIE: No, wait, let me explain  
DUGGAN: What do you think you're doing, you fool!  
BENNETT: Oh, he's no fool, are you. You're a saboteur!  
JAMIE: No, I'm not! I'm  
BENNETT: Shut up!  
(Duggan tries to remove the plastic with another spray.)  
DUGGAN: It's no good. He's wrecked it.  
BENNETT: Completely?  
DUGGAN: Yeah.  
BENNETT: Watch him.  
JAMIE: All right. I won't give you any trouble.  
DUGGAN: Too right, you won't!  
(Bennett makes a broadcast.)  
BENNETT: Now hear this. This is the Controller.

**[Corwyn's office]**

(Zoe and Corwyn listen.)  
BENNETT [OC]: All men on Security duty to issue themselves with sidearms at
once. Easy Yellow security plan to be put into effect immediately. Two off-
duty men, security

**[Wheel Operations room]**

BENNETT [OC]: Section, report to the power room on the double!  
RYAN: Easy Yellow? Well now what's the sudden panic?  
LERNOV: I told you Bill and the Controller were up to something.  
RYAN: I'd better log out the blasters. Keep a eye on the Hercules cluster,
will you? Zoe thinks one of the stars in Messier 13 is about to enter the nova
state.  
LERNOV: That's all we need! A star blowing into a thousand pieces. I told you
my nose never lets me down.

**[Rocket control room]**

(Two fully 'grown' Cybermen have hatched from those spheres. They get
instructions from a strange cybernetic creature via the monitors.)  
PLANNER [on monitor]: Report.  
CYBERMAN 1: Phase one complete.  
PLANNER [on monitor]: Cybermats are launched.  
CYBERMAN 1: Phase two complete.  
PLANNER [on monitor]: You are undetected on the rocket?  
CYBERMAN 1: Phase three ready.  
PLANNER [on monitor]: Report again after phase three.

**[Corridor]**

VOICE [OC]: All sections, Easy Yellow alert.  
CORWYN: You'd better check your theory, Zoe.  
ZOE: Oh, I'm right. Hercules 208 in Messier 13 is definitely on the blink. I
can tell you what the radiation affect will be on Earth, if you like.  
CORWYN: Not now.  
ZOE: I suppose you're going to see the fun, whatever it is.  
CORWYN: Somehow, I don't think this is fun.

**[Power room]**

(Two guards are holding Jamie as Duggan checks the capacitator.)  
DUGGAN: Yeah, I see.  
BENNETT: Well?  
DUGGAN: Yeah.  
BENNETT: Well?  
DUGGAN: You've done a good job, boy.  
BENNETT: What's the exact damage?  
DUGGAN: Serious, sir. All of the primary relay contacts are fused shut. This
whole unit'll have to be stripped down.  
BENNETT: How long?  
DUGGAN: Well, that depends on how much plastic he used and how far down it
went.  
BENNETT: How long?  
DUGGAN: I honestly don't know, Chief.  
BENNETT: Well surely you can give me some idea? Without the laser beams, we're
virtually helpless.  
DUGGAN: All right, well, let's assume the worst, that the laser's absolutely
finished. I mean, this charged storage part of it. A replacement could take a
week.  
BENNETT: A week?  
(Corwyn enters.)  
CORWYN: What's the trouble, Jarvis?  
BENNETT: This young idiot has ruined the laser. Poured quick-seal plastic
right into the relay lines of the booster mirrors!  
CORWYN: Why?  
BENNETT: Sabotage!  
JAMIE: No.  
BENNETT: What are you? One of these pull back to Earth maniacs? Where are your
friends, eh? Out there in deep space just waiting to come in and attack us
when you put our laser out of action?  
JAMIE: Och, you're talking rubbish!  
DUGGAN: You can't deny anything, boy. We saw you.  
JAMIE: I'm not denying it.  
CORWYN: Is the laser really out of action, Jarvis?  
BENNETT: Yes, it is.  
CORWYN: Zoe's calculated a new star going nova. We haven't checked with radar
yet but she's usually right.  
BENNETT: How bad?  
CORWYN: The radiation flux will swing the Perseus shower right in on us. With
the laser we could at least knock some of them out.  
DUGGAN: Hey, I'd better get started.  
BENNETT: We must confirm Zoe's figures with the radar computers. Come on,
bring him.  
(Duggan makes a broadcast as Bennett, Corwyn, Jamie and his guards leave.)  
DUGGAN: All hands to the power room. Immediate and urgent. All hands to the
power room. Oh, what a mess.  
(A Cybermat enters.)  
DUGGAN: Well, I'll be. Hey. Hey, hang on. Hang on, I'm not going to hurt you.
Well, where did you spring from? You're metal. Hey, you're a strange little
creature, aren't you? Some form of space bug?  
(There are footsteps outside. Duggan picks up the Cybermat and puts it in a
cupboard.)  
DUGGAN: Well, Billy, we'd better hide you, Billy Bug, or they'll think that
I've gone bonkers.  
(Two men enter.)  
DUGGAN: Ah. Lets get started right away, shall we?

**{Wheel Operations room]**

BENNETT: Confirm Zoe's figures on radar computers two and five. You didn't let
yourself know what you're letting yourself in for, did you? Have you ever been
in a sky station when a meteorite hits?  
JAMIE: Look, I'm sorry.  
CORWYN: Why did you do it?  
JAMIE: Well, they said that you were going to blow up the rocket.  
BENNETT: So?  
CORWYN: Why not?  
JAMIE: Well, I couldn't let you, that's all.  
BENNETT: Why? Why?  
JAMIE: Because the Doctor told me to protect it.

**[Rest room]**

(The Doctor is sitting up against an angled bed. There's a padded silver chair
in the corner and monitoring equipment nearby.)  
DOCTOR: Well that's marvellous, isn't it? The Doctor told me to protect it.
You don't give a reason, just leave me to get you out of trouble.  
JAMIE: Well, I had to stop them destroying the rocket, didn't I?  
DOCTOR: Oh, I suppose so.  
JAMIE: Of course I did. I mean, what about the Tardis? A fine thing if they'd
blown that to pieces.  
DOCTOR: I was just beginning to enjoy this little rest.  
JAMIE: Anyway, what are you going to tell them?  
DOCTOR: I don't know. Jamie, what exactly did happen on the rocket? Well don't
look at me like that.  
JAMIE: You don't remember?  
DOCTOR: It's a bit hazy.  
JAMIE: Well, I found you lying in the corridor near that locked control room.
Something had just shaken up the rocket and tumbled me out of bed and, well,
whatever it was must have made you stumble as well.  
DOCTOR: I suppose I hit my head.  
JAMIE: You honestly can't remember?  
DOCTOR: No, but it's there. It's there at the back of my mind.  
JAMIE: Well, what about the machine then? The one that was going to attack
you. Now surely you remember that?  
DOCTOR: Machine? No. But there's something. Some warning, some menace.

**[Rocket control room]**.

PLANNER [on monitor]: Report progress.  
CYBERMAN 1: All phases proceeding as planned.  
PLANNER [on monitor]: Prepare phase four.

**[Wheel Operations room]**

CASALI: Yes. Yes, it's all happening in the Hercules cluster okay.  
ZOE: I told you. The same thing happened in the Perseus cluster a week ago.  
LERNOV: Except we had the laser then. We could deflect the meteorites.  
CASALI: Picture. There it is. And beginning to emit hard gamma already.  
(The dots are on the radar screen.)  
RYAN: It's bigger than the Perseus one, Rico.  
CASALI: It's four magnitudes up. Well, I see if I can get some further
information for you.  
RYAN: I'd better give the bad news to the Controller.  
LERNOV: Leo, what we going to do if Bill can't repair the laser in time?  
RYAN: Well, we've got the convolute force field.  
ZOE: The neutron barriers won't help us. A star of this magnitude when it goes
nova, deflects meteorites with a mass of two hundred tons each.  
LERNOV: Two hundred  
ZOE: At least.  
RYAN: Aren't you ever wrong?  
ZOE: Rarely.  
RYAN: No, it's all a problem in solid geometry to you, isn't it. Don't you
care what happens here?  
ZOE: Well, of course. I'm only telling you what's going to happen.  
RYAN: Just like a robot. Fact, calculations.  
LERNOV: Leo!  
RYAN: Proper little brainchild. All brain and no heart!

**[Power room]**

(The plasticised unit is being removed.)  
DUGGAN: Gently now, gently. Keep it upright. Good, good. Fine, get maintenance
started on that right away, will you?  
(The technicians leave. Duggan spots the Cybermat by the cupboard.)  
DUGGAN: Hello Billy-bug. You should had stay where I  
(He picks up a piece of debris by a box labelled Bernalium.)  
DUGGAN: Hey, did you do this? (He opens the cupboard and the Cybermat scurries
away.)  
DUGGAN: What have you done?  
(Rudkin enters)  
RUDKIN: What's the matter?  
DUGGAN: What? Oh, nothing. How's it going?  
RUDKIN: Okay now. Doctor Corwyn's taken me off communications.  
DUGGAN: Good. Good.  
RUDKIN: The Controller asked me to come and see how you were getting along.  
DUGGAN: Ohm you can tell him we're making good time. Er, hey, come on, will
you do something for me?  
RUDKIN: Yes?  
DUGGAN: Go into to Spares and ask them to check their Bernalium stock, will
you?  
RUDKIN: Right.  
(Rudkin leaves. Duggan checks the boxes in the cupboard.)  
DUGGAN: Well, that's all right, anyway. I'll murder that little pest.  
(Duggan goes to work on the laser and two Cybermats come out from the broken
box.)

**[Rest room]**

(Corwyn is using the John Smith device to check the Doctor.)  
CORWYN: You and your friend are healthy specimens, aren't you.  
DOCTOR: Oh, we keep fit one way and another. I suppose all this mean I've got
to get up.  
CORWYN: No, I'm afraid not just yet.  
DOCTOR: Oh good.  
CORWYN: Does your head ache?  
DOCTOR: Well, it did, but it's better now.  
CORWYN: Any loss of memory?  
DOCTOR: Well, just a little.  
CORWYN: Does it make you anxious?  
DOCTOR: I think you'll find my psyche in very good order.  
CORWYN: Probably, but don't strain to remember. Concussion can bring about
temporary lapses in memory. There is quite a lot we don't know about the
memory bank yet, you know. Good. I suppose the part that you can't remember is
why you told Jamie to protect the rocket.  
DOCTOR: Oh yes, I can, perfectly. We're not saboteurs, you know.  
CORWYN: Probably not.  
DOCTOR: The last thing we want to do is to interfere with what you're doing
here, or put you in any danger. You saved our lives on that rocket and we're
very grateful.  
CORWYN: But you have interfered. We are in the path of a very serious
meteorite storm, the second we've been threatened with in a week. Only we have
no defence against this new one.  
JAMIE: But I tell you, I didn't know about the meteorites.  
CORWYN: I hope not.  
JAMIE: I don't even know what they are.  
(Zoe enters.)  
ZOE: Is it all right? The guard said you are here.  
DOCTOR: Guard?  
CORWYN: We can't let you roam about wherever you want to.  
JAMIE: Aye, we're under arrest.  
DOCTOR: Oh, no.  
ZOE: How did you pilot the rocket, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: I don't think we've met, have we?  
CORWYN: Zoe, Doctor John Smith, isn't it?  
JAMIE: John. (nudging the Doctor) John.  
DOCTOR: Oh. Oh, yes. And what do you do here, Zoe?  
ZOE: I'm an astrophysicist. Pure mathematics major.  
CORWYN: With honours.  
DOCTOR: Oh, I am impressed.  
CORWYN: We use Zoe as our second opinion.  
ZOE: You didn't answer my question.  
DOCTOR: What question?  
JAMIE: You know, I'm surprised you didn't know the answer. Now don't tell me
there's something you can't work out.  
ZOE: How did you pilot the rocket ship? You see, I've calculated its original
course. It was a service and supply station for number five station, overdue
and presumed lost nine weeks ago. Well, the rocket couldn't drift eighty seven
million miles off course.  
DOCTOR: So what's your theory?  
ZOE: Well, there's a record of the last contract with the Silver Carrier
rocket. It had seven million miles to touchdown and enough fuel for twenty
million. Well, it couldn't have drifted here off course in the time involved.
It must have been driven and piloted.  
JAMIE: Oh, a right wee space detective.  
ZOE: There's only one solution. That rocket was re-fuelled in space. Provided
with at least with another twelve fuel rods.  
DOCTOR: Well, it's an interesting theory.  
ZOE: Oh, it isn't a theory. You can't disprove the facts. It's pure logic.  
DOCTOR: Logic, my dear Zoe, merely enables one to be wrong with authority.
Supposing there was a faulty automatic pilot.  
ZOE: To drive a rocket eighty seven million miles on fuel for twenty million?  
DOCTOR: Well, it's a possibility.  
ZOE: That rocket was driven here somehow. I know it was.

**[Rocket control room]**

(On the Silver Carrier, things are moving along.)  
PLANNER [on monitor]: We have ionised a star. Perseid meteorites will strike
the Wheel.  
CYBERMAN 2: Phrase three is in operation.  
PLANNER [on monitor]: The Cybermats will consume Bernalium. Without Bernalium
the Wheel cannot deflect the meteorites.  
CYBERMAN 1: They will discover Bernalium on board this rocket-ship.  
CYBERMAN 2: Phrase four is ready.  
PLANNER [on monitor]: Remove telemeter control from Cybermats. (Transmission
ends. Cyberman 1 zaps the clock face and the third hand starts whizzing around
as the ammeter needle maxes out, switches flick and lights blink. On the
Wheel, the Cybermat's eyes flash.)

**[Corwyn's office]**

CORWYN: Let me get this right, Bill. You say the Bernalium is  
DUGGAN: Gemma, it's useless. All of it.  
CORWYN: What about the reserve?  
DUGGAN: Yeah. I had a check made of the stock but then I remembered I'm
holding most of it over in the Power room. Well, you know how much we rely on
those Bernalium rods. I mean, they're the only ones that stand up inside the
X-ray laser.  
CORWYN: I'm far more interested in these creatures of yours.  
DUGGAN: Oh, there's only one of them. At least, that's all I've found.  
CORWYN: Did anyone else see it?  
DUGGAN: No.  
CORWYN: Did you tell anybody else about it?  
DUGGAN: Oh, you're joking. Look, they think I'm a nut anyway for messing about
with space flora. How do you think they're going to react if I tell them I
found a space bug.  
CORWYN: What's it like?  
DUGGAN: Oh, it's smallish, about so big. Made of metal or some light tensile
material.  
CORWYN: And you say that it eat metal?  
DUGGAN: No, not exactly. It's sort of draws the life out of it, you know.
Corrodes it. You should see what it's done to the Bernalium stock.  
CORWYN: But how did this space bug get into the Wheel in the first place?  
DUGGAN: You can search me, I just found it. It could have gone through one of
the loading bays or one of the airlocks.  
CORWYN: Yes, I suppose that's possible.  
DUGGAN: What's the matter? You think I am a nut too, do you?  
CORWYN: No, but I want to see this creature for myself, Bill.  
DUGGAN: All right. Come on, I'll introduce you to Billy Boy.

**[Power room]**

(Rudkin enters. He sees the Cybermats rooting around the Bernalium boxes, and
grabs a wrench from a shelf. The Cybermats head for him then their eyes light
up. Rudkin screams and drops the wrench, clutching his wrist. Two more
Cybermats appear, surrounding him. Rudkin grabs the Quick drying plastic spray
and covers one Cybermat with it. Its friends zap him again and he drops the
spray, both hands now useless. He screams as they move in again. Corwyn and
Duggan hear him in the corridor and run to help.)

**[Rest room]**

(The screams are heard in the rest room. Jamie and Zoe run to the door and are
stopped by the guard.)  
FLANNIGAN: You can't come out.  
JAMIE: What was that scream?  
FLANNIGAN: I don't know. It sounded as if all the devils in hell was hounding
someone, but you still can't come out.

**[Power room]**

(Duggan and Corwyn enter to find Rudkin amongst the remains of plants and
shelving.)  
DUGGAN: Is he dead?  
CORWYN: Yes. I'll tell the Controller.  
(Corwyn sees the plastic covered lump on the floor.)  
CORWYN: What's that?

**[Rest room]**

(The lump is on a tray and being examined by the Doctor. Jamie is prodding it
with his sgian dubh.)  
ZOE: The Controller's mounted an immediate enquiry. I'm much more interested
in this.  
DOCTOR: This was found by the body, was it?  
ZOE: Yes. I had to get one of the men to take a floor plate up. You just can't
cut through hyperoxide. It's polymer strength is higher than chrome steel.  
DOCTOR: The Gordian knot couldn't be untied, either.  
ZOE: I don't know what that means.  
JAMIE: Oh it means that there's er  
DOCTOR: It means there's always a solution.  
JAMIE: Aye.  
DOCTOR: And the Bernalium is a write-off, is it?  
ZOE: Completely. We've got a few spares but not half enough. We'll have to get
more up from Earth.  
DOCTOR: And the X-ray laser gun, the main armament of the Wheel, relies on
Bernalium?  
ZOE: Do you think there's a connection?  
DOCTOR: It's a possibility, isn't it. Jamie, what do you think?  
JAMIE: Me? Well, there can be a saboteur on board. Jarvis Bennett, de did say
something about a group of people. Earth For Earth, something like that.  
ZOE: Well, there are such people. They do want to stop the space programme.  
JAMIE: Aye, well, just supposing they planted a saboteur on board, waiting for
the right moment. Along drifts the rocket and we're abroad. The saboteur
thinks this is the right moment and strikes.  
DOCTOR: And murders?  
JAMIE: Well, if he was caught messing about with the Bernalium stuff, he may
had to kill.  
DOCTOR: Well, it's an interesting theory.  
JAMIE: But it fits.  
DOCTOR: Hmm.. It doesn't fit this.  
ZOE: Which we can't cut inside. JAMIE: Och, it's just a spare part or
something. The dead man tried to defend himself, used the quick set plastic,
it misfired and went over this bit of machinery.  
DOCTOR: Well, we can find out.  
ZOE: How?  
DOCTOR: With the X-ray machine.  
ZOE: Of course. Why didn't I think of that?  
JAMIE: Aye, why didn't you?  
ZOE: Well, all I had to go on was the fact that hyperoxide is unbreakable. I
just didn't think of X-rays.  
DOCTOR: Simple common sense works wonders sometimes, Zoe.  
ZOE: Well, at least you didn't think of X-rays. That would have been awful.

**[Wheel Operations room]**

(Duggan is getting a dressing-down.)  
BENNETT: You're under restriction. I'll have you back to Earth on the next
ship that puts in. I want a written report on the whole affair, and I want it
in my hands tomorrow morning, first thing. That's all.  
(Duggan moves away.)  
BENNETT: He's confined to quarters. Tanya, you'll have to take over some of
Leo's operations.  
LERNOV: Very well.  
BENNETT: Now, Leo, I want that laser working as soon as possible. Get on to it
at once.  
CASALI: Controller.  
BENNETT: In a minute. Now, all of you. Let's get back to normal working
conditions. Gemma, I want a word with you in my quarters. All right?  
CASALI: Laleham and Vallance are ready, sir. Waiting for a go-ahead.  
BENNETT: Give it.  
CASALI: Yes, sir. Hello, travel party. You are free to embark now. We will
operate air pass doors and emergency stand-bys.  
VALLANCE [OC]: Entering departure hatch for oxygen rating now. Standing by.  
CASALI: Yes, receiving you. Stand by for  
(Bennett and Corwyn leave, and we pan over to the other side of the room.)  
VOICE [OC]: This is Voyager 8 standing by, station 3.  
LERNOV: I'm sorry, Bill.  
DUGGAN: It's my own fault. I'm a fool.  
LERNOV: You didn't do anything.  
DUGGAN: I should have told somebody. I know the old man doesn't believe me but
there was a creature there.  
RYAN: We did search round, Bill. Your power house is in a heck of a mess.
There wasn't a sign of anything.  
DUGGAN: I didn't dream it, did I? Oh, what's the use of talking. Rudkin's
dead. I'd give anything to. Oh, what's the use of talking. (Duggan leaves.)  
LERNOV: I thought you said you found some corroded metal in the Power room.  
RYAN: Yes. Gemma wanted me to keep quiet about it until she talked to Jarvis.
You know, all this extra work means we won't be spending all too much spare
time together.  
LERNOV: I'll find someone else to keep me company. I'd hate it if you didn't
have a sense of humour.

**[Corwyn's office]**

BENNETT: No, no, no! There's too much unexplained. Too many irrational
phenomena. What's the matter with you people? I can't turn round without
somebody dreaming up some odd little thing happening, some bit of emotionally-
based fantasy!  
CORWYN: Calm down, Jarvis.  
BENNETT: Did you hear that fool, Duggan. Space rodent. The man's a wreck.  
CORWYN: Jarvis, will you listen?  
BENNETT: If it's sensible, yes.  
CORWYN: I like to go through some facts.  
BENNETT: All right. All right, I'm listening.  
CORWYN: One, the rocket drifts near us. Two, drops in temperature, temporary,
adjustment back to normal. Three, drops in air pressure, temporary, adjustment
back to normal. Four, two meteorite storms of above average dimension, both
within seven days. Five, two strangers bought to the Wheel. One of them
sabotages our armaments.  
BENNETT: Don't lump all those things together. I thought that you were going
to be sensible.  
CORWYN: They could be connected.  
BENNETT: Oh, for heaven's sake, Gemma, don't you start. What are you going to
do, make trouble?  
CORWYN: We've got trouble, Jarvis. You're putting your head in the sand. Bill
Duggan's apparitions, call them what you like, only started appearing after
the rocket appeared, after the drops in air pressure. And Bernalium, the one
thing vital to our defences, Bernalium is corroded just at the time when we're
facing a big meteorite storm. I tell you that rocket is the basis of all our
troubles.  
BENNETT: Well don't you worry about that. I've got some men to go across and
look it over. But mysteries? Please, Gemma, not you as well.

**[Rest room]**

ZOE: The X-rays are processed now. Can you turn out the light, Jamie?  
DOCTOR: Here we go. Now, let's see what we got. (The image projected on the
wall clearly shows what is inside the plastic.)  
ZOE: What's that?  
DOCTOR: It's a Cybermat!  
JAMIE: Aye.  
DOCTOR: The lights, Jamie, the lights. Cybermats.  
JAMIE: That means the Cybermen must be here too.  
DOCTOR: Yes, and there is only one place where they can be. On that rocket!

**[Rocket control room]**

(Tethered together, the two space walkers have reached the airlock and gone
inside. They see boxes of Bernalium, then two Cybermen enter. They are zapped
from the Cybermen's helmet device, and become still.)  
CYBERMAN 1: You will take us to the Wheel.  
CYBERMAN 2: Obey. Inside the Wheel, you will help us. You will obey.

__**Episode Four**__

**[Rest room]**

BENNETT: And what's all that supposed to mean?  
DOCTOR: The Cybermen are threatening this Space Wheel.  
BENNETT: Cybermen? Where'd you dream up a name like that.  
ZOE: The study of a system of control and communication in animals, and
devices such as cybernetic machines.  
BENNETT: What are you talking about?  
ZOE: Cybernetics.  
BENNETT: I know all there is to know about Cybernetics. I don't need a lecture
from you.  
DOCTOR: But Cybermen exist. You've got to believe me. You've got to!  
BENNETT: On the evidence of one faked-up X-ray shot.  
ZOE: It's not faked-up. I took it myself, Controller.  
BENNETT: Well, what are these Cybermen then?  
DOCTOR: They were once men, human beings like yourself, from the planet
Mondas, but now they're more robot then man.  
BENNETT: You mean half and half?  
DOCTOR: Oh no, more than that. Their entire bodies are mechanical and their
brains have been treated neuro-surgically to remove all human emotions, all
sense of pain. They're ruthless, inhuman killers!  
BENNETT: You really expect me to believe that rubbish!  
DOCTOR: It's not rubbish! They'll kill anyone who stands in their path. You've
got to believe me. You've just got to!

**[Rocket Control room]**

CYBERMAN 1: You will ferry us to the Wheel. Obey. Inside the Wheel you will
help us.  
(The two Cybermen climb into a large empty crate and lie down. Laleham and
Vallance fit a false floor over them then fill the space with Bernalium fuel
rods.)

**[Rest room]**

DOCTOR: But don't you understand? The Cybermen will get inside this space
Wheel.  
BENNETT: Nothing just comes in and out of this Wheel, What do you think this
is, a jet heliport?  
DOCTOR: They already sent their Cybermats in to weaken you.  
JAMIE: Look, listen to him. He's telling you the truth!  
BENNETT: No, I'll tell you what he's doing. What too many people are trying to
do. I don't know why, it must be space sickness. They're spreading fear,
alarm, terror. You think I can't see it?  
CORWYN: He's sincere, Jarvis. At least listen  
BENNETT: How could anything get inside the Wheel, Gemma, How? How could it get
through the airlock. Perhaps it'll float through the loading bay in full view
of everybody.  
CORWYN: It's still worth listening and taking precautions just in case there
is some truth in all this.  
BENNETT: Don't try and tell me my job, Gemma. I am still Controller of this
Wheel and things will be run in my way. Any orders to the contrary can come
from Earth Central. That's what.  
(Bennett stops in mid-sentence and leaves.)  
DOCTOR: Oh, dear. How do you convince a man like that?  
CORWYN: That X-ray. I think Bill Duggan should see it. Go and find him, will
you Zoe?  
ZOE: Isn't he confined to his quarters?  
CORWYN: Have him bought here, under guard if necessary, but get him. I'll be
responsible.  
(Zoe leaves.)  
CORWYN: Jarvis was right about one thing, Doctor. These Cybermen of yours
can't just walk into the Wheel, you know.  
DOCTOR: They will find a way.  
(Laleham and Vallance are space walking back to the Wheel trailing the crate
behind them.)

**[Wheel Operations room]**

(Lernov is in charge of the shift and Casali is reporting to Earth.)  
CASALI: Rain belts block normal. That completes the advance weather
information, Earth Central. This is Space Station W 3 signing out.  
VOICE [OC]: Thank you, W 3. Thanks for the good news. Signing out.  
CASALI: Survey party calling in. Yes, come in survey party.  
VALLANCE [OC]: Coming in to loading bay, Control.  
LERNOV: Ask why. Airlock five is all ready.  
CASALI: Is anything wrong? Airlock five is ready for you.  
VALLANCE [OC]: We found a whole crate of Bernalium on the rocket. Bringing it
over with us. Approval please, Control.  
CASALI: This'll buck the old man up a bit.  
LERNOV: Yes. I'll go check.  
CASALI: Just checking with control, Armand. Await confirmation.  
BENNETT [on monitor]: Yes?  
LERNOV: Survey party report a find of Bernalium. They are bringing it over
from the rocket. Can I give them the go-ahead?  
BENNETT [on monitor]: Somebody's using their brains as last. Yes, we need it
badly. Good work, good work.  
LERNOV: All right, Enrico.  
CASALI: Hello, survey party. All clear on the cargo now. I'm clearing the
loading bay for your arrival.  
LERNOV: Close off airlock five and clear loading bay.

**[Rest room]**

DUGGAN: Well, that's it, all right.  
CORWYN: What you call Billy Bug?  
DUGGAN: Yes.  
CORWYN: You're sure about this?  
DUGGAN: I'm definite. I thought I'd come across some strange space creature.  
DOCTOR: It's an alien machine. Destructive. Capable of killing.  
DUGGAN: It seemed like a space rodent. Look, I know you all think I'm crazy,
but  
CORWYN: Of course not, Bill. After all, you discovered space flora out here.
When you found the Cybermat you obviously thought that it was space fauna.  
DOCTOR: Yes, it's a pity you didn't tell somebody sooner.  
DUGGAN: Maybe so, Doc, but look at what happened when I did tell the old man.  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
ZOE: I'd better take you back, Bill. I've got some new calculations to do on
those meteorites. Half of the space fleet might be flying straight into them.  
(Zoe and Duggan leave.)  
DOCTOR: Meteorites. Yes. Now the Cybermats must have sent in to destroy the
laser gun but  
CORWYN: They nearly did.  
DOCTOR: What?  
CORWYN: Well, I assume they did. They seem to have taken a liking to all the
stock of Bernalium on board. The laser needs constant supplies of Bernalium
rods.  
DOCTOR: You see, Jamie.  
JAMIE: I see right enough. If I haven't put the laser out of action, the
Cybermats would have.  
DOCTOR: Yes, but why?  
JAMIE: It's obvious. Put the Wheel out of action and make it defenceless.  
DOCTOR: But the Wheel must have other defences?  
CORWYN: Magnetic field deflectors. The meson shield. They can counter-act
small meteorites.  
DOCTOR: No, I think the Bernalium was destroyed for another purpose, but what?
What?  
(Laleham and Vallance have entered the loading bay with the crate. The main
doors close and the bay is pressurised.)

**[Wheel Operations room]**

ZOE: Progress readings on the star Hercules 208 in Messier 13. Radar computer
reading  
JAMIE: What are you doing?  
ZOE: Bank A 208 point 16, Bank B 321 point 64. Lateral grid  
JAMIE: Are you talking to yourself? ZOE: James Robert McCrimmon, do you
realise what you have done?  
JAMIE: What have I done?  
ZOE: Well, I was recording some very important readings, and now you're on my
tape.  
JAMIE: Eh?  
ZOE [OC]: Progress readings on the star Hercules 208 in Messier 13.  
JAMIE: How did you do that without moving your lips?  
ZOE [OC]: Radar computer reading  
JAMIE [OC]: What are you doing?  
ZOE [OC]: Bank A 208 point 16, Bank B 321 point 64. Lateral grid  
JAMIE [OC]: Are you talking to yourself?  
JAMIE: Sorry. Have I ruined it?  
ZOE: No, not really.

**[Corridor]**

ZOE: Is there anything you want?  
JAMIE: No, I'm all right.  
ZOE: Well, I've got some calculations to do on those new readings.  
JAMIE: Aye, everybody's so busy. Not that they'd talk to me anyway.  
ZOE: Well, you did get off to a bad start.  
JAMIE: You mean ruining the laser. Aye, I suppose I did. Anyway, I had to do
that.  
ZOE: Why?  
JAMIE: Well, er, well, I can't really tell you.

**[Power room]**

RYAN: Would you hold that light still, Flannigan.  
FLANNIGAN: My arm's getting tired.  
RYAN: Oh, you are a great help.  
ENGINEER: Just another few seconds, sir.  
RYAN: Would you get me that driver over there. Come on, hurry up. Right. Now,
my beauty.  
(Bennett enters.)  
BENNETT: How's it going?  
RYAN: Oh, hello, sir. All right, Penny. Well, the boys could do with a break.
They've worked non-stop.  
BENNETT: I'm giving you Bill Duggan, No reason why he can't make himself
useful. You others take a break. Keep up the good work.  
RYAN: Right sir.  
BENNETT: Yes.  
(Bennett leaves, Duggan enters.)  
RYAN: Oh boy, am I glad to see you, Bill.  
DUGGAN: How's it look?  
RYAN: Oh, we just had a bit of luck. The central deployment complex didn't get
any plastic.  
DUGGAN: Oh, that's great. What about the Bernalium?  
RYAN: Oh, I haven't got around to that yet. Go on, you two, hop it.  
FLANNIGAN: Well, if it's all the same with you, sir, we'll just grab a snack
and be back in five minutes.  
RYAN: You'll take forty five minutes and like it.  
FLANNIGAN: Right.  
(The engineers leave.)  
DUGGAN: What about you? You look done in.  
RYAN: Oh, I can't leave you on your own. It needs at least two to handle this
thing.  
CHANG: Some people have all the luck. The Controller said you needed some
help. Of course, I have only done two watches in a row.  
RYAN: Congratulations. I've done three.  
DUGGAN: Oh, go and shove off, Leo. Chang and I can handle this.  
RYAN: Well, I  
DUGGAN: Come on, I know how to get to the Bernalium, don't I?

**[Rest room]**

CORWYN: It's an extraordinary X-ray.  
(The Doctor's skull, not the Cybermat.)  
DOCTOR: Extraordinary? Extraordinary?  
CORWYN: I dare say your head'll ache for a quite a while yet but at least
there's no damage.  
DOCTOR: Oh, I'm so glad there is no damage. Miss Corwyn.  
CORWYN: Mrs.  
DOCTOR: Oh. Oh, forgive me.  
CORWYN: My husband died in the asteroid belt three years ago.  
DOCTOR: Oh. I'm so sorry.  
CORWYN: My name's Gemma.  
DOCTOR: Gemma. How nice. Gemma, tell me. Tell me about the Controller, Jarvis.  
CORWYN: Tell you what?  
DOCTOR: He's a strange man to be in a position like this.  
CORWYN: In ordinary circumstances. no.  
DOCTOR: Are there any ordinary circumstances in space?  
CORWYN: Jarvis is simply a man who can't accept phenomena outside the laws of
physics.  
DOCTOR: Yes, that's a very accurate  
CORWYN: Were you going to say diagnosis?  
DOCTOR: You're very perceptive.  
CORWYN: You see in this failing of his a medical weakness.  
DOCTOR: Don't you?  
CORWYN: Normally he's more than capable of commanding this station. It's a
continuous and merciless responsibility.  
DOCTOR: Exactly. One does wonder what a man like that will do when faced with
a problem for which he has no solution.  
CORWYN: I must confess I've been concerned. Jarvis shows signs of blocking off
his mind. He just can't face the truth.

**[Wheel Operations room]**

BENNETT: Everything in order here?  
LERNOV: Well  
BENNETT: Yes, yes. I can see it is. Good, good.

**[Rest room]**

CORWYN: But you need rest. You really shouldn't get up yet.  
DOCTOR: Of course I have to get up.  
CORWYN: Can you persuade him to rest?  
JAMIE: Oh, it's no good trying to stop him.  
CORWYN: But it's much too soon.  
DOCTOR: Now, Gemma, be reasonable. I know the dangers. The Cybermen need to
colonise. They must have the treasures of Earth.  
CORWYN: You can't leave this room. Jarvis has given orders.  
DOCTOR: He's not in control of himself.  
CORWYN: I'm sorry, Doctor. I can't countermand any orders the Controller's
issued.  
JAMIE: He's as stubborn as you are.

**[Corridor]**

BENNETT: (to guard) Everything in order here? Good. Good.

**[Rest room]**

BENNETT: Up and about again, eh? That's better. I've done the tour, Gemma.
Everything's running like clockwork.  
CORWYN: Fine. I'd like to talk to you about the rocket.  
BENNETT: Yes, everything's going very well. Very well indeed. You must want to
stretch your legs. Get someone to take you round.  
DOCTOR: Oh. Oh, thank you. You will tell the guard, won't you?  
BENNETT: (to guard) Off you go. Everything's in order here.  
CORWYN: Jarvis.  
BENNETT: You might want to make a note about morale, Gemma. It's excellent.
Never been better.  
CORWYN: But  
BENNETT: Yes, there's nothing we can't handle. Nothing. Tired now. Turn in, I
suppose, and get some sleep. Yes, that's good. I'll need you first watch. Yes,
keep up the good work. Keep up the good work.

**[Power room]**

(Duggan is inspecting some of the remaining Bernalium rods.)  
DUGGAN: These are no good anyway. They're covered in plastic.  
CHANG: Laleham and Vallance bought back a load of Bernalium from the rocket.  
DUGGAN: Well, just don't stand there, go and grab a dozen sticks. With a bit
of luck, we can replace these and reassemble in a couple of hours. Well, go
on, chop-chop.  
CHANG: I'm on my way.

**[Loading bay]**

(Change goes down the steps to the empty bay. The crate has been unpacked and
the boxes of Bernalium are next to it. Chang picks one up and is about to
leave when he notices that the crate is not as it should be. He lifts a board
from the false bottom and looks inside, but it is empty. A metallic hand grabs
his shoulder. Chang twists away and throws the Bernalium at the Cyberman,
making it stagger. The second Cyberman appears with Laleham and Vallance.)  
CHANG: Help me!  
(Chang runs for the steps, but the Cybermen zap him with energy from their
chest units. Laleham and Vallance each pick up a box of Bernalium and leave as
the Cybermen dispose of Chang.)

**[Wheel Operations room]**

(An instrument panel comes to life.)  
LERNOV: Enrico?  
LERNOV: Oh, hello, Leo.  
CASALI: Hello, Chief.  
LERNOV: Have you had notice of anybody using the waste incinerator in the
loading bay?  
CASALI: No, I don't think so. I'll check.  
RYAN: What's the problem?  
LERNOV: Somebody just used the incinerator in the loading bay, that's all.  
CASALI: No, no, there's nothing here.  
RYAN: You'd better put it in the log, Tanya. Somebody's for the high jump.

**[Power room]**

(Laleham and Vallance enter with their boxes.)  
DUGGAN: Hello, boys. Hey, good on you. Where's Chang?  
LALEHAM: Cut his hand. He's gone to the Medical bay.  
DUGGAN: Trust him.  
VALLANCE: Anything to be done?  
DUGGAN: Yeah, you can open up a box of rods. Got this job licked. I just hope
the rods are the right dimensions, that's all.  
LALEHAM: They are.  
DUGGAN: Since when have you been a expert?  
VALLANCE: The lasers have to be made operative or the meteorites will destroy
the Wheel.  
DUGGAN: No. Well why do you think I'm sweating my back off here? Here, what's
up with him?  
LALEHAM: They're the right ones.  
DUGGAN: Yes, so they are. You must be psychic. But don't tell the old man. He
doesn't believe in extra sensory perception.  
(Duggan puts a rod into the capacitator.)  
DUGGAN: Hey, this is perfect. Marvellous!  
VALLANCE: When will the repair be finished?  
DUGGAN: It won't be done at all if you keep nattering.  
VALLANCE: The meteorites must not harm the Wheel.  
DUGGAN: That storm really worries you, doesn't it? Well, don't let it, don't
let it. It'll be a close call but I reckon to have this laser ready and in
operation in six to seven hours. So you can sleep in your beds like babies,
the pair of you. Daddy won't let anything happen to you.  
(Behind Duggan's back, Vallance opens the door and lets a Cyberman in.)  
DUGGAN: Now, if you really want to make yourself useful.  
(Duggan turns and sees the Cyberman, which uses its hypnosis beam on him.)  
CYBERMAN 1: The Wheel must be protected from the meteorites. We will assemble
your laser defence rays. You will go to Central Control.  
DUGGAN: Central Control.  
LALEHAM: The Operations Room.  
CYBERMAN 1: These are your orders.

**[Rest room]**

(Doctor Corwyn is reading Bennett's medical file when Zoe enters.)  
CORWYN: Oh, Zoe, it's you. What do you want?  
ZOE: Well, it's rather difficult to explain.  
CORWYN: What is it?  
ZOE: Well, I've done a report. Some calculations I've been doing. I was
ordered to forget them.  
CORWYN: Ordered? By whom? What report?  
ZOE: My calculations on the orbital path of the meteorite storm. I found a new
element which indicated a critical state and I reported my findings to the
Controller.  
CORWYN: And he ignored them.  
ZOE: Yes. Well, you don't sound very surprised.  
CORWYN: No.  
ZOE: Well, he said it was all perfectly normal, but it isn't.  
CORWYN: He's getting worse.  
ZOE: Is he ill?  
CORWYN: I don't know yet.  
ZOE: Well, if he is he's chosen a rather inconvenient time, hasn't he?  
CORWYN: Do you ever feel anything emotional, Zoe?  
ZOE: Emotional? Do you know, that's the second time I've been asked that in
the last few hours. Leo Ryan said that I was all brains and no heart.  
CORWYN: Yes, it's your training. I shouldn't worry about it.  
ZOE: Oh, but I do. I don't want to be thought of as a freak. Leo said I was
like a robot, a machine. I think he's right. My head's been pumped full of
facts and figures which I reel out automatically when needed, but, well, I
want to feel things as well.  
CORWYN: Good. Unfortunately the parapsychology unit at the City tends to
ignore this aspect in its pupils. Some of them never fully develop their human
emotions.  
ZOE: You don't think I'll be like that, do you?  
CORWYN: No. No, you seemed to have survived their brain-washing techniques
remarkably well.  
ZOE: Oh, good.  
CORWYN: Now, about these calculations of yours.

**[Wheel Operations room]**

(The Doctor is getting a tour.)  
LERNOV: And this last one is how we check everything.  
DOCTOR: I see.  
RYAN: Yes, anything that uses energy on the Wheel, however small, is
registered on this wall. From a coffee-grinder upwards  
DOCTOR: Do you have any coffee?  
RYAN: Would you like some?  
DOCTOR: I'd love some, I really would.  
LERNOV: I have a coffee pellet. Would you like one?  
DOCTOR: That's better than nothing.  
(Zoe enters and catches their attention.)  
RYAN: Excuse me, Doctor. Tanya.  
DOCTOR: Oh, yes, of course.  
JAMIE: Doctor, don't forget we need that mercury stuff for the Tardis.  
DOCTOR: No, Jamie, I haven't forgotten. I'm worried about the Tardis. If I'm
right and those Cybermen are. What's going on?  
(There's an intense conversation happening.)  
JAMIE: Let's find out.  
DOCTOR: What's going on, Zoe?  
ZOE: I've done some new calculations on the orbital path of the meteorite
storm. They're heading toward us faster than we thought.  
JAMIE: Don't you have any cheerful news?  
ZOE: Facts are facts, and these are indisputable.  
DOCTOR: I wouldn't dream of contradicting you. Can you repair the laser gun in
time?  
ZOE: Well, that's not the worry, it's the Controller. I went to him with the
new data on the meteorites and he just brushed the whole thing aside.  
DOCTOR: Oh dear, he's getting worse.  
ZOE: That what Doctor Corwyn says. He is ill, isn't he?  
DOCTOR: Why aren't you worried about the laser gun? I thought all of the
Bernalium has been destroyed.  
ZOE: Oh no, some more turned up.  
DOCTOR: Oh good.  
ZOE: Yes, two of the men bought a crate of it over from the rocket.  
DOCTOR: Ah. What? What did you say?  
ZOE: Well, that's what Flannigan said. I met him when he was going off duty.  
DOCTOR: Gemma! Gemma, did you know about this Bernalium from the rocket?  
CORWYN: Yes, Tanya told me.  
DOCTOR: Don't you see what it means? The Cybermen are here. They came over in
that crate.  
CORWYN: But how could our two men have bought them over?  
DOCTOR: But they didn't know what they were doing. They were just obeying
orders.  
CORWYN: The Cybermen hypnotised them?  
DOCTOR: Yes, something like that.  
CORWYN: We're not exactly children, Doctor. All spacemen are protected against
brain-control by drugs.  
DOCTOR: Yes, but a psychotropic drug is only effective against a known enemy.
Have you induced repulsion in all parts of the brain yet?  
CORWYN: No, but then there's the implanted Silenski capsules. It gives off a
signal when there is an adverse influence against the wearer.  
DOCTOR: How can we check?  
CORWYN: Tanya, I want to check the Silenski circuit.  
LERNOV: But I shall have to activate the whole defence network.  
CORWYN: I'll authorise the extra power.  
LERNOV: Watch the lines. If they're steady then everything is normal.  
DOCTOR: I see.  
LERNOV: Try this room first.  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, please. Is that all right?  
(Jamie and Zoe see Duggan.)  
JAMIE: What's he hanging around for? I thought that he was under guard or
something.  
ZOE: So did I. Bill, has the Controller  
(Duggan ignores Zoe and goes past.)  
LERNOV: Here, Wait a minute. Look.  
CORWYN: Someone is affected, Doctor. You were right.  
LERNOV: Someone in this room.  
DOCTOR: Er, can we pin it down to an individual?  
LERNOV: I'll quarter the room off. Over there, in the direction of  
DOCTOR: No, stop him!  
(Duggan smashes the communications desk with a heavy spanner. It goes bang,
killing Duggan.)  
DOCTOR: He's dead. Now, now listen, listen everyone. The Cybermen are here, in
this Wheel. They took over this poor fellow to stop you sending for help or
signalling to Earth. Now just a minute. Gemma, you must alert the whole Wheel
and you'll need something stronger than drugs to stop your people from being
taken over. It doesn't matter how crude it is. A metal plate and a transistor
will do. Tape them to the back of the neck. It will absorb the Cyber control
signals.  
RYAN: I can do that.  
DOCTOR: Yes. Good.  
LERNOV: I'll help you.  
DOCTOR: Right.  
JAMIE: What do we do?  
DOCTOR: We're going hunting, Jamie.  
JAMIE: Are you sure you know who's going to be hunted.  
DOCTOR: A very good question. Come on.  
(The Doctor and Jamie leave.)  
ZOE: Can I do something?  
LERNOV: No.  
ZOE: Isn't there anything I can do.  
LERNOV: Well, all right.

**[Loading bay]**

(The Doctor and Jamie carefully descend the steps. The crate and Bernalium
boxes are still there.)  
JAMIE: Doctor.  
DOCTOR: What is it?  
JAMIE: There it is.  
DOCTOR: Jamie, I know. Now, shush.  
(The Doctor examines the crate and finds the false bottom.)  
JAMIE: Is this it here?  
DOCTOR: Yes, this is it.  
JAMIE: How could they get in here?  
DOCTOR: It's a false bottom, you see.  
(They start to search the rest of the bay then hear metal on metal. A Cyberman
is coming down the steps.)

__**Episode Five**__

**[Loading bay]**

(The Doctor and Jamie hide behind the crate and watch the Cyberman take one of
the boxes of Bernalium then leave.)  
JAMIE: That was close.  
DOCTOR: It's so easy.  
JAMIE: What?  
DOCTOR: I don't understand them.  
JAMIE: What are you talking about?  
DOCTOR: Destroying the wheel, Jamie, that's what I'm talking about. From the
outside it's strong enough, but now that the Cybermen are inside, I  
JAMIE: Yes, I see what you mean. What do you think they are planning?  
DOCTOR: Well, they obviously don't want to destroy the Wheel.  
JAMIE: What do they want, then?  
DOCTOR: I wish I knew. The first thing we must do is to protect the people
here.  
JAMIE: How?  
DOCTOR: What's the thing which we need to survive which the Cybermen don't?  
JAMIE: Food.  
DOCTOR: Always thinking of your stomach, aren't you. No. Air, Jamie, air. Now,
I wonder how this works.  
(The Doctor hits a video comm. button.)

**[Wheel Operations room]**

LERNOV: It's the Doctor.  
DOCTOR [on monitor]: Hello. I think that it would be wise to lock all the air-
lock doors. Can you do that?  
RYAN: Yes.  
LERNOV: Leo says that he can. Why?  
DOCTOR [on monitor]: The Cybermen are definitely on the Wheel. Jamie and I
have just seen one. They may try to interfere with the air supply.  
JAMIE [on monitor]: Doctor.  
DOCTOR [on monitor]: What? Keep this channel open.  
JAMIE [on monitor]: Something moved over there. Just caught the corner of my
eye.  
CORWYN: What's wrong?  
LERNOV: I don't know.  
RYAN: Shall I seal off the airlocks, Gem?  
CORWYN: Yes.  
RYAN: Sealing off all the airlocks.  
LERNOV: I suppose that we can trust the Doctor?  
CORWYN: I'm not sure why I do, but I do. Sealing off the airlocks is good
common sense anyway.

**[Loading bay]**

JAMIE: There.  
(It's a Cybermat. The Doctor speaks into the video comm.)  
DOCTOR: Listen to me very carefully. Do as I ask and don't delay. One of the
Cybermats is very close to us. It'll tune into our brain waves at any minute.  
JAMIE: Doctor, it's turning!  
DOCTOR: Hook up a variable audio-frequency on this channel right away. Do it
at once!

**[Wheel Operations room]**

CORWYN: Enrico, leave that.

**[Loading bay]**

JAMIE: There's a second one. Come on.  
DOCTOR: No. We don't stand a chance. They've got a range of at least ten feet.

**[Wheel Operations room]**

DOCTOR [on monitor]: Hurry. Please hurry.  
CORWYN: Come on, Enrico.  
CASALI: All right, all right! That's it. Power! More! Come on, come on!  
(The sound whine travels through the comm. circuits and builds in the loading
bay. The Doctor and Jamie cover their ears and the Cybermats start veering
around out of control, bumping into each other. One starts to go in tight
circles until it smokes and stops while the other rushes head first into a
wall to expire in a flash.)

**[Wheel Operations room]**

CORWYN: That's enough, Enrico.

**[Loading bay]**

DOCTOR: We're coming back as fast as we can. This is what you've saved us
from.

**[Wheel Operations room]**

LERNOV: What that's thing?  
ZOE: It's a Cybermat.  
DOCTOR [on monitor]: Exactly.  
(Meanwhile, in the Power room, a Cyberman uses a portable communicator to
contact the Mother ship and the Cyber-Planner.)  
LERNOV: Leo. There's an energy reading from the power house.  
RYAN: It's not coming off our power source, that's for sure. Let's check it
out.

**[Power room]**

CYBERMAN: All Cybermats have been destroyed.  
PLANNER [on monitor]: Destroyed? By what method.  
CYBERMAN: They have used high-current phase contrast.  
PLANNER [on monitor]: One human has knowledge beyond our predictions. Report.  
CYBERMAN: The X-ray laser machine is repaired.  
PLANNER [on monitor]: And operative?  
CYBERMAN: Yes. In stage of operation.  
PLANNER [on monitor]: Communication beam to Earth?  
CYBERMAN: Attacked and damaged.  
PLANNER [on monitor]: Phase six.  
CYBERMAN: Yes.  
PLANNER [on monitor]: The space station is to be taken over. Complete Phase
six.

**[Wheel Operations room]**

RYAN: Workshop. Workshop, will you come in please?  
CASALI: Well, Bill Duggan knew the right spot okay.  
LERNOV: What about radar?  
CASALI: Radar's fine but the radio's kaput.  
LERNOV: When's the next check to Earth Central?  
CASALI: Oh three hundred. Two hours time.  
LERNOV: Set up a check on the first wave of the meteorites.  
CASALI: I don't see the point. We haven't got a laser to knock them out with.  
LERNOV: Don't be pessimistic, Enrico. They may not have a direct course onto
us. Anything can happen.  
CASALI: Everything is.  
RYAN: Blimey, you'd think we are alone on the Wheel. I can't raise anybody.  
LERNOV: Have you told Gemma?  
RYAN: She's got her hands full enough as it is.  
CORWYN: Jarvis? Jarvis, look at the creature. Show it to him, Zoe.  
(Zoe holds up an inanimate Cybermat.)  
BENNETT: No. No, it's not true. It's not true.  
CORWYN: All right, Zoe, put it away somewhere. Complete withdrawal. Loss of
effect.  
DOCTOR: Not necessary complete. Catatonic features certainly.  
CORWYN: I can try ECT. He could be shocked back to normal.  
DOCTOR: Is the equipment here?  
CORWYN: No, it's in the Medical bay.  
DOCTOR: Oh, I wouldn't advise moving him. You've thrown a magnetic forcefield
round this section?  
CORWYN: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Enough to keep the Cybermen out?  
CORWYN: Enough to keep anything out. The crew have been warned. Oh.  
DOCTOR: No, it's no good. You're second in command. You must take over.  
CORWYN: Take over what? We're invaded. We have no contact with Earth, we're in
the path of meteorites. Take over what? How do we fight without the laser?  
(On the other side of the room.)  
JAMIE: How is he?  
ZOE: Hopeless.  
JAMIE: Well, that's just fine.  
ZOE: He's just closed himself away.  
JAMIE: Well, who's the second in command?  
ZOE: Doctor Corwyn.  
JAMIE: At least she's all right.  
ZOE: Yes, although what she can do, I don't know.  
JAMIE: Oh, there is something you don't know, then.  
ZOE: There's too much I don't know. I was trained to believe logic and
calculation would provide me with all the answers. Well, I'm just beginning to
realise there are questions which I can't answer.  
JAMIE: You're just not trained for an emergency like this.  
ZOE: Well, that's the whole point. What good am I? I've been created for some
false kind of existence where only known kinds of emergencies are catered for.
Well, what good is that to me now?  
JAMIE: Hey, we're not done yet, you know.  
ZOE: And if we survive? What then, Jamie? Suppose we do get ourselves out of
this mess. What have I got left? A blind reliance on facts and logic.  
RYAN: Section Twelve. Section Twelve. Will you please come in?  
(In section twelve, Oxygen Supply, a crewmember is about to answer the call
when a Cyberman grabs him from behind.)  
RYAN: Calling Power house. Power house, will you please come in?

**[Power room]**

(As Flannigan enters, Laleham and Vallance come out of the shadows.)  
FLANNIGAN: Oh, it's yourself. Why don't you answer this thing. Somebody sounds
a bit violent.  
VALLANCE: It's not important.  
FLANNIGAN: Ah, it could be the old man himself, you know. Well, is this laser
working yet, is it?  
LALEHAM: It's finished.  
FLANNIGAN: Ah, so we're not to be riddled with the meteorites then?  
VALLANCE: No.  
FLANNIGAN: Well, that's great. I've a whole years leave coming to me back on
Earth. Now come on.  
LALEHAM: Don't touch that.  
FLANNIGAN: You just can't ignore it. What is it? What's the matter with you
two, hey?  
VALLANCE: Just do as you're told.  
FLANNIGAN: Hey now, have you both gone mad or what?  
(Vallance points a gun at Flannigan.)  
FLANNIGAN: Don't point that thing at me, laddie.  
(Flannigan knocks the gun from Vallance's hand and floors him. Laleham
brandishes a crowbar.)  
FLANNIGAN: All right. If it's a fight you're after, I'm your man. Come on.  
(Laleham swings the crowbar and misses.)  
FLANNIGAN: You need a few lessons in the noble and manly arts, me bucko! All
right, come on!  
(Laleham and Flannigan fight, and Vallance picks up his weapon. Vallance
fires, missing Flannigan and killing Laleham instead. A Cyberman enters and
hypnotises Flannigan.)  
CYBERMAN: The Earth machine has been installed?  
VALLANCE: Yes.  
CYBERMAN: A force field has been set around the Operations Control room. How
is it operated?  
VALLANCE: Only from within the Operations Room.  
CYBERMAN: Dispose of the body of the human.

**[Wheel Operations room]**

(Zoe is giving Bennett some water.)  
ZOE: Come on, some more. Just a little more.  
BENNETT: No, no more.  
LERNOV: Don't force him. Give him whatever he wants.  
DOCTOR: Well, I'm not surprised you can't get in touch with the rest of the
Wheel.  
JAMIE: Aye, the Cybermen aren't going to sit around and do nothing.  
CORWYN: But can they still control our people? I thought you'd  
DOCTOR: With the metal plates, you mean. Has everybody had them fitted to the
back of their necks?  
CORWYN: No, not yet. There are still some crew members without.  
DOCTOR: Well, it would be advisable to have it done.  
RYAN: Coming through now.  
CASALI: I lost them for a moment there.  
(Everyone goes over to the radar screen.)  
CASALI: Hey, will you listen to that? Now this is a big storm, bigger than we
thought.  
RYAN: All right, all right, don't make it worse.  
CORWYN: We'll have to rely on the anti-matter field projectors.  
CASALI: Hey, you don't think the meteorites are going to bounce off them, do
you? We're talking about things weighing two or three hundred tons here.  
CORWYN: How far away are they?  
CASALI: See for yourself. Less than a million miles now. Closing on an
elliptical path tilted ten degrees.  
(The video comm. beeps.)  
RYAN: Well, thank goodness for that. Must be one of the other sections.  
FLANNIGAN [on monitor]: Power room.  
RYAN: Flannigan, where've you been?  
FLANNIGAN [on monitor]: Restoring the laser discharge piece.  
RYAN: What was that?  
FLANNIGAN [on monitor]: It has been completed.  
RYAN: The laser's repaired?  
FLANNIGAN [on monitor]: It is ready for testing now.  
RYAN: Great. The laser's working. Stand by to run a test. Flannigan, where
have you been? I've been trying to raise you for ages.  
FLANNIGAN [on monitor]: There must be a fault on the line. Vallance is here
with me. We are ready when you are ready.  
RYAN: Right.  
(A hatch opens on the outer surface of the Wheel, and a laser cannon comes
out.)  
CASALI: We're cutting it too fine. They're coming at us too fast. Seven
hundred thousand now. Six ninety, six eighty. The speed of them, it's
fantastic.  
RYAN: Take position from radar calibration estimates.  
CASALI: Angle ninety on zero four zero two. Distance now six ten thousand, six
dead, five ninety.  
JAMIE: What's the range of your machine?  
CORWYN: Fifty thousand miles total destruction, ninety thousand partial.  
DOCTOR: Well, it would be as well not to miss then, wouldn't it.  
RYAN: We'll try a random shot. At least we'll see how the power bank reacts.
Stand by to test laser. Blue button. Red on stand by.  
CASALI: Angle eighty eight on zero four zero one now. Distance closing. Five
hundred thousand dead. Four ninety, four eighty.  
RYAN: Tanya, take a power reading on this. And fire!  
LERNOV: Power maximum and normal.  
RYAN: Well, everybody? I think we stand a chance.  
(The meteorites continue on course.)  
CASALI: Angle eighty eight on zero four zero one and holding. Distance
closing. Three fifty thousand, three forty, three thirty. Angle change. Eighty
seven on zero four zero point nine nine recurring. Distance two eighty
thousand, two seventy, two sixty.  
(The laser is fine tuned while the Doctor, Jamie and Corwyn watch.)  
RYAN: Stand by for further tests on lasers.  
LERNOV: Power max one hundred. All systems green and steady.  
RYAN: Red on stand by. Fire.  
LERNOV: Power maximum and normal. All systems operating.  
RYAN: Stand by for test blanket fire. Red on stand by.  
LERNOV: Power max one thousand. All systems green and steady.  
RYAN: And fire.  
LERNOV: Power maximum and normal. All systems operative.  
RYAN: Well, let'em all come. We're ready for them.  
DOCTOR: I think it is reasonable to assume that the Cybermen caused that star
to go nova.  
CORWYN: Deliberately causing the meteorites to deflect from their orbit to
destroy the Wheel, you mean?  
DOCTOR: No. Not to destroy the Wheel. To make you want to use the laser. Then
they sent in their Cybermats to attack the laser and destroy the Bernalium.  
JAMIE: And then you'd search that drifting rocket and find a big crate.  
DOCTOR: With the Cybermen inside it.  
JAMIE: Aye.  
DOCTOR: It was only way they could get into the Wheel.  
CORWYN: And now you think they've repaired the laser.  
JAMIE: They must have done, otherwise they'd be smashing up the Wheel,
wouldn't they?  
DOCTOR: So you see this isn't just an attack by an alien race on a space
station. The Cybermen have another purpose.  
CORWYN: What?  
DOCTOR: They have an over-riding ambition to invade the Earth, plunder its
mineral wealth, and somehow they see a way of doing it through this Wheel.  
CORWYN: But how can we stop them?  
DOCTOR: I don't know.  
CORWYN: Presumably these Cybermen disposed of the crewmembers of the rocket in
space?  
DOCTOR: Hmm? Yes. Jamie, the Time Vector Generator from the Tardis. Where is
it?  
JAMIE: Oh you mean the gold rod thing?  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, where is it?  
JAMIE: You've got it. I put it your pocket in the rocket.  
DOCTOR: Are you sure?  
JAMIE: Yes?  
DOCTOR: But I haven't got it.  
JAMIE: You must have. Not unless it's fallen out when they were moving you. Is
it important?  
DOCTOR: Important? Someone'll have to go over to the rocket to get it.  
JAMIE: Good luck to them. Who's going?  
DOCTOR: Well, if Gemma can spare someone to show you how to make the journey.  
JAMIE: Me?  
DOCTOR: Yes, of course. You're the only one who knows what it looks like
besides me, and I'm much too busy. Besides, it's your fault that it's lost.  
JAMIE: Mine?  
DOCTOR: Well, isn't it?  
JAMIE: Well, yes. No! Doctor Corwyn. Oh Doctor. Och.

**[Power room]**

PLANNER [on monitor]: The meteorite shower is approaching the Wheel.  
CYBERMAN: The weapons of the Earth humans have been tested and are operating.  
PLANNER [on monitor]: Phase six can be completed.  
CYBERMAN: The Earth humans have set up a neutron field barrier on the
perimeter of the section containing their room of Operations.  
PLANNER [on monitor]: Do not complete Phase Six. Initiate Plan Three.  
CYBERMAN: Follow me.  
(Vallance and the Cyberman leave.)

**[Corridor]**

CORWYN: Replace the field barrier now. We're through.  
ZOE: I'll see of it's clear ahead.  
JAMIE: I still don't see why you should send a wee thing like that with me.  
CORWYN: She is the only one I can spare who knows enough about space drill to
get you across to that rocket safely.  
JAMIE: Maybe so. I still think I'm better by myself.  
CORWYN: Do you? I wouldn't be too sure if I were you.

**[Wheel Operations room]**

RYAN: Have you gone off your head?  
DOCTOR: She, she agreed to go.  
RYAN: She'd no right to agree. And you've got no right to let her.  
DOCTOR: I had to. Jamie will look after her.  
RYAN: Have you any idea of the dangers they'll face between the Wheel and the
rocket? And you've send Zoe and your friend out into an area which is bound to
be bombarded with small debris, quite apart from the radiation and the thermal
shock.  
DOCTOR: Well, they knew the risk. Zoe calculated it.  
RYAN: Oh, yes, Zoe calculated it. And what about Gemma, hey? What if Gemma
meets up with one of those Cyberman things?  
CASALI: Coming in to range now.  
RYAN: All right. Now you don't do anything unless I say so. Clear? Tanya, take
a power reading on this. Rico, calculate distance and direction. All systems
on stand by.

**[Oxygen supply room]**

(Corwyn, Zoe and Jamie find a crewman.)  
JAMIE: He's dead.  
CORWYN: Yes, I'm afraid so. Zoe, the emergency exit. You'll find space
equipment in the airlock.  
ZOE: Come on, Jamie.  
JAMIE: All right. You'd better take that.  
(He hands Corwyn the dead man's blaster and goes to the airlock.)  
CORWYN: Good luck.  
JAMIE: Thank you.  
(Corwyn closes the airlock then goes to the video comm.)

**[Wheel Operations room]**

DOCTOR: Yes?  
CORWYN [on monitor]: We're through. No problems.  
DOCTOR: Good.  
CASALI: Main concentration coming into range.  
RYAN: Crossover on vector link. Countdown is from now.  
CASALI: Well, this is the big stuff. Angle ninety on zero three. Distance, one
hundred thousand miles.

**[Oxygen supply room]**

(Corwyn hides behind a bank of machinery as Vallance enters carrying a small
box. A Cyberman follows him.)  
CYBERMAN: This controls the oxygen on the Space Station.  
VALLANCE: Yes.  
CYBERMAN: Open it.  
(The box contains some silver capsules.)  
CYBERMAN: Each section of the Wheel has a separate air supply.  
VALLANCE: (Yes.  
CYBERMAN: Insert one capsule into each section. The oxygen will turn into pure
ozone. The humans will die.

**[Wheel Operations room]**

RYAN: Fire! Fire! And fire!  
CASALI: Oh, it's hopeless. There's too many of them.  
RYAN: Shut up, Rico. Fire!  
CASALI: Angle change. Ten degrees.  
DOCTOR: Yes?  
CORWYN [on monitor]: Doctor, listen carefully. They're going to

**[Oxygen supply room]**

CORWYN: Poison the air supply. Do you understand? poison the air supply?  
(The Doctor sees movement behind Corwyn.)  
CORWYN: Tell Leo Ryan to switch over to the sectional supply unit.

**[Wheel Operations room]**

DOCTOR: Gemma, run! Get away from there! Run!  
(Corwyn fires her blaster. The Cyberman is slowed for a moment and Corwyn runs
for the door but she is zapped and killed before she can open it.)  
DOCTOR: Gemma, can you hear me? Gemma! Gemma!  
CASALI: Angle of deviation ten degrees.  
RYAN: And fire!  
DOCTOR: Gemma!

**[Space]**

(Jamie and Zoe watch the exploding meteorites.) JAMIE: Zoe, look!  
ZOE: The meteorites, they're heading straight for us!

__**Episode Six**__

_(From the Lost in Time DVD)_

**[Wheel Operations room]**

RYAN: Fire!  
(Several meteorites explode. Jamie and Zoe grab each others hand to try and
stay together in the shock waves.)  
CASALI: We're hitting them!  
DOCTOR: What about Jamie and Zoe?  
LERNOV: Leo, the shock radiation and blast  
RYAN: Fire!  
LERNOV: But you must think about the two children.  
RYAN: I can't think about anything except those meteorites. Fire!  
LERNOV: But Zoe and the boy will be  
RYAN: I can't help that. They'll have to take their chances. Range, Rico?  
CASALI: One eighty, one ninety.  
RYAN: Right, new sequence. Red on standby. Fire!  
LERNOV: They'll be blown out of space.  
DOCTOR: Zoe calculated the risk. Let's hope she was right.  
RYAN: Fire! (More meteorites go Boom! and this time Jamie and Zoe can't hang
onto each other in the shockwaves. They drift apart.)  
CASALI: The screen's clear, sir. We've done it. Main body deflected.  
DOCTOR: Any signs of Jamie and Zoe?  
CASALI: No, I won't be able to pick them up on the video screen until the
static has cleared.  
RYAN: Well, keep it on blue stand by for now. There's bound to be a cloud of
smaller stuff following on behind.  
CASALI: Yeah, okay.  
RYAN: And do a check on all circuits. Maintain all power levels till further
notice.  
CASALI: No, I can't find them.  
RYAN: Watch out for smaller meteorites, Rico. Now then, you know what you've
done, don't you? Those two kids out there have probably either been burnt up
by radiation or fried by thermal blast. Always assuming, of course, they
weren't actually hit by any of that rubbish.  
DOCTOR: Do you think I don't know that? It was a calculated risk that had to
be taken.  
RYAN: Why?  
DOCTOR: Because there's something on board that rocket that we've got to have
if we're going to beat the Cybermen.  
RYAN: And that justified risking two lives?  
DOCTOR: Yes, to save many. But anyway, we're all going to get killed shortly
unless you switch over to sectional air supply.  
RYAN: What are you talking about?  
DOCTOR: The Cybermen are going to poison the air.  
RYAN: How do you know?  
DOCTOR: Gemma told me.  
RYAN: Where is she?  
DOCTOR: She's in the Oxygen room.  
RYAN: Right, well, I'll talk to her.  
DOCTOR: No, no. Well, you can't. She's dead.  
(Ryan switches on the wall monitor and sees Corwyn's body lying on the floor.)  
DOCTOR: She sacrificed her life to warn us.  
CASALI: Here comes another swarm. Meteor bearing forty five, thirty six.  
RYAN: Right.  
LERNOV: Any sign of Zoe and the boy?  
CASALI: No.  
RYAN: All systems on stand by. We'll try three second interval shots. Stand by
to reinforce the anti-matter field around the Wheel. Maybe we can turn them
off course.  
CASALI: Coming into range.  
RYAN: Right. Tanya, watch the power levels.  
RYAN: The Bernalium rods must be nearly burned out by now.  
CASALI: In range now. Bearing one eighty one ninety as before.  
RYAN: Red on stand by. Fire! Fire!  
LERNOV: Power's dropping, Leo.  
RYAN: Switch over to anti-matter field projectors!  
CASALI: They're turning. We've deflected them!  
DOCTOR: Well, thank heavens. Hello, where's Jarvis? (Bennett is striding along
a corridor. Lernov switches the wall monitor to different views searching for
him.)  
RYAN: There he is. Jarvis! Jarvis, what are you doing? Jarvis, what are you
doing? Come back.  
BENNETT [on monitor]: No, I'm going on. They've killed Gemma, you know.  
LERNOV: Please come back.  
BENNETT [on monitor: I lifted the force field. You'd better replace it.  
LERNOV: Leo, where are you going?  
RYAN: To bring him back.  
DOCTOR: No, wait. You're too late. Look!  
(Bennett turns to see the Cyberman walking up behind him.)  
RYAN: Jarvis, watch out!  
(Bennett walks towards the Cyberman, ready to grapple with it, but is easily
overpowered. The control room watches in horror as the Cyberman lifts Bennett
up over its head and throws him down the corridor. Then it zaps him with the
chest unit ray.)  
LERNOV: Turn it off. Turn it off!

**[Rocket control room]**

(Jamie brings Zoe a drink with a straw.)  
JAMIE: Here.  
ZOE: Oh, thanks, Jamie.  
JAMIE: How do you feel now?  
ZOE: I didn't think we'd get through. I feel as if someone's been hitting me
all over with small hammers.  
JAMIE: Aye. Just you take it easy.  
ZOE: Oh, it's all right. I'll help. What's this thing like we're looking for?  
JAMIE: It's about that long, gold, with a gold tip on one end and a white one
on the other. Now, you're sure you're all right? Come on, then.

**[Oxygen supply room]**

(Large lava lamps are above the control panels.)  
CYBERMAN: The meteorites have been destroyed. Now we will take over. You have
inserted the capsule in the air supply?  
VALLANCE: Yes.  
CYBERMAN: Inject it into the system. Effective penetration should be
immediate. Report.  
VALLANCE: Negative. They must have switched over to the emergency supply.  
CYBERMAN: That cannot be reached?  
VALLANCE: No. It is inside the force field.  
(The Cyberman switches on his portable communicator.)  
PLANNER [on monitor]: Do you report success?  
CYBERMAN: No. Our plans are anticipated.  
PLANNER [on monitor]: Wait. The data will be computed. One of the Earth humans
must have experience of our methods. Projection of all identities on the Wheel
is essential.

**[Rocket control room]**

JAMIE: Zoe, I've found the rod. Look! This is the  
(Zoe has the Oxygen supply room on the monitor.)  
ZOE: The Cybermen. I must have broken in on their frequency. This may be
important.

**[Oxygen supply room]**

(The Cyberman communicates with Vallance via the head device.)  
CYBERMAN: Stare into the box. Think of each individual human being at present
on the Wheel. Form the image in your eyes.  
(Over the image of the Planner we see the crew as Vallance names them.)  
VALLANCE: Tanya Lernov, Astrogater, Second Class.  
PLANNER [OC]: Negative.  
VALLANCE: Leo Ryan, Communications Officer.  
PLANNER [OC]: Negative.  
VALLANCE: Jarvis Bennett, Space Station Controller.  
PLANNER [OC]: Negative.

**[Rocket control room]**

ZOE: They seem to be talking about the whole crew of the Wheel, one after the
other.  
JAMIE: But why? What're they after?  
VALLANCE [OC]: Zoe Heriot, Astrophysicist.

**[Oxygen supply room]**

VALLANCE: Astrometricist, First Class.  
PLANNER [OC]: Negative.  
VALLANCE: Doctor. I don't know who he is.  
PLANNER [OC]: Name.  
VALLANCE: I don't know.  
PLANNER [OC]: Name?  
VALLANCE: I don't know. I don't know

**[Wheel Operations room]**

RYAN: But what possible use could the Wheel be to these Cybermen, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: That remains to be seen.  
RYAN: I don't see why you don't accept my theory that they're simply attacking
us.  
DOCTOR: But they wouldn't go to all this trouble just to knock out one small
space Wheel.  
LERNOV: Leo! There's something on radar.  
RYAN: What?  
CASALI: It's not a meteorite. Look, it's changing course.  
LERNOV: There are no ships due in this part of space.  
CASALI: Anyway, it's too big for one of our ships.  
DOCTOR: It could be a Cyberman spaceship.  
RYAN: Moving in for the kill.  
DOCTOR: Possibly.  
RYAN: What about radio, Rico? We must contact Earth for assistance.  
CASALI: Oh no, not a chance, though I could fix it up okay but I need some
transistors and they're in the Power Room.  
RYAN: Then one of us will have to go and get 'em.

**[Rocket control room]**

PLANNER [OC]: Positive. The Doctor is known and recorded. An enemy. He must be
lured outside the force field and destroyed.  
JAMIE: They're going to try and trap the Doctor. Come on, let's get back and
warn him.

**[Wheel Operations room]**

(Looking at blueprints of the Wheel.)  
LERNOV: And these are corridors leading to Power Room.  
RYAN: Well that's no good. We don't know where those Cybermen'll be.  
LERNOV: How else is he going to get there? Though the cable tunnels?  
RYAN: No, no, they're blocked off here and here. That just leaves the
emergency air tunnel.  
FLANNIGAN [on monitor]: Captain.  
RYAN: Flannigan! Where are you?  
FLANNIGAN [on monitor]: In the corridor outside the Spares and Workshop. I've
got a whole bunch of them locked up in the Workshop.  
RYAN: Is the way clear through to the Power House?  
FLANNIGAN [on monitor]: It is, but they're melting down the doors. I can't
hold them for much longer.  
RYAN: Well, look, one of us has got to come for some radio spares. Will you
bottle them up as long as possible?  
FLANNIGAN [on monitor]: Right. I will seal off the other compartments but
you'd better send someone quickly for them spares.  
RYAN: Right.  
FLANNIGAN [on monitor]: They may be trying the other doors.  
DOCTOR: Excuse me. Tell him I will go for the spares.  
RYAN: You? Well, surely it's better if I go.  
DOCTOR: I think that it's essential that I go.  
RYAN: All right, it's your neck. Look, Flannigan, the Doctor's coming for the
spares. Now, hold them back for as long as you can.  
FLANNIGAN [on monitor]: I will meet up with the Doctor in corridor six.  
RYAN: Right.  
DOCTOR: Now listen, as soon as Flannigan comes through the force field, grab
him!  
RYAN: Grab him? What for?  
LERNOV: And he isn't coming here. Didn't you hear him? He's going to meet you
in corridor six.  
DOCTOR: I somehow don't think he will. Now please do as I say. I'll have the
map. Now remember, don't trust him. Check the metal plate on the back of his
neck.  
LERNOV: But you'll get

**[Corridor]**

(Flannigan meets a Cyberman.)  
FLANNIGAN: The Doctor is coming to corridor six.  
CYBERMAN: Return to the Operations room. Destroy the force field after they
let you through.  
(Jamie and Zoe are space-walking back to the Wheel.)  

**[Power room]**

(The Doctor opens a grating in the wall and climbs through. He goes over to a
trolley and picks up a small bottle.)  
DOCTOR: Ah, mercury.  
(He pockets the bottle, picks up a circuit board and checks the corridor
outside is clear. Then he goes to a workbench and picks up some coils of
wire.) DOCTOR: Yes, I don't see why it shouldn't work.

**[Landing bay]**

(Out of their spacesuits, Jamie and Zoe come in through the emergency exit and
see Corwyn on the floor.)  
JAMIE: Doctor Corwyn!  
(She is clearly dead. They go up the steps. Shortly afterwards they walk
through a door labelled Oxygen Supply room into -)

**[Corridor]**

ZOE: Flannigan!  
FLANNIGAN: What are you two doing wandering about? Them creatures are all over
the place.  
JAMIE: We know they are.  
FLANNIGAN: Follow me. This way's quicker.  
(Flannigan, Zoe and Jamie leave, the Cyberman and Vallance enter.)  
CYBERMAN: The Doctor has not come.  
VALLANCE: He must have gone another way.  
CYBERMAN: How?  
VALLANCE: Through the air tunnels. There is one leading to the Power Room.  
CYBERMAN: Show me.

**[Wheel Operations room]**

(Flannigan enters with Jamie and Zoe. Ryan spots him and grabs him before he
can touch a control panel.)  
JAMIE: Hey, what you doing?  
ZOE: He led us here!  
LERNOV: He was under Cyberman influence.  
JAMIE: What?  
(Ryan puts the anti-hypnosis device on the back of Flannigan's neck.)  
RYAN: Right, he'll be all right now. Sit him down over there for a while,
Rico.  
ZOE: You mean he was being controlled?  
RYAN: Yes. You were dead lucky.  
JAMIE: Aye. Here, where's the Doctor? The Cybermen are going to try and lure
him away and trap him.  
LERNOV: He's already gone.  
JAMIE: What?  
DOCTOR [on monitor]: I've got the spares.  
JAMIE: Doctor, be careful!  
DOCTOR [on monitor]: Jamie! Oh thank heavens. Are you and Zoe all right?  
JAMIE: Yes. Now listen. The Cybermen know you're on the Wheel. They're going
to try and trap you.  
DOCTOR [on monitor]: Yes, yes, I guessed they would. Have you got the Time
Vector Generator?  
JAMIE: Yes.  
DOCTOR [on monitor]: Good! Now, now listen to me, I want you to bring it to
me. Get someone to show you the way through the air corridors. Hello. I think
I've got company.  
(Transmission ends.)  
JAMIE: Company? What does he mean? (the penny drops) Company!

**[Power room]**

(Two Cyberman are standing in front of the door.)  
DOCTOR: I suppose you've come for me.  
CYBERMAN 1: You know our ways.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I thought you'd realise somebody did. I imagine you have orders
to destroy me.  
CYBERMAN 2: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Tell me one thing. Why did you order Duggan to destroy radio
communication with the Earth? After all, that is why you want possession of
the Wheel, isn't it?  
CYBERMAN 1: You know our ways.  
DOCTOR: That doesn't answer my question.  
CYBERMAN 2: He was instructed to destroy only the transmitting complex.  
DOCTOR: Oh, I see. How interesting. Yes, of course. And presumably your large
spaceship holds your invasion fleet, and the smaller ships can only enter the
Earth's atmosphere by homing on a radio beam.  
CYBERMAN 2: You know our ways. You must be destroyed.  
DOCTOR: Yes, well, I was afraid you'd get back to that. Well, you'd better
come in.  
(Cyberman 1 steps forward, the Doctor throws a switch and electricity crackles
through its headpiece. It collapses. Number two tries to use its chest unit.)  
DOCTOR: You can't get through the field, you know.  
CYBERMAN 2: You will be destroyed. Others are coming.  
(Cyberman 2 leaves. The Doctor turns off the electric field. Jamie comes
through the grating with Flannigan.)  
DOCTOR: Jamie! Is he all right?  
JAMIE: Yes.  
FLANNIGAN: I've got a head like a big bass drum. Somebody's going to pay for
this.  
JAMIE: Oh, it looks like the Doctor's already made one of them pay.  
DOCTOR: Yes, but they're sending in reinforcements, probably through the
Loading Bay. Have you got the rod? Thank you. I'm going to try and fix this
into the laser gun circuit. With any luck, I should be able to boost the power
enough to destroy the Cyberman spaceship. But you'll have to hold them off at
the loading bay. I need time.  
FLANNIGAN: Right, leave that to me.  
DOCTOR: Well, there's still a Cyberman left, so watch out for him.  
(Flannigan picks up a mini-extinguisher.)  
FLANNIGAN: Well, I think I know just the thing for him.  
DOCTOR: Good. Here's a metal plate for Vallance.  
(Jamie catches it.)  
JAMIE: Leo Ryan says you're to call him.  
(Jamie leaves.)  
FLANNIGAN: Let's see how them creatures like this stuff!  
(Flannigan leaves.)

**[Wheel Operations room]**

CASALI: That ship's closing in on us.  
DOCTOR [on monitor]: I'm trying to put some extra power in your laser. Line it
up on the Cyberman spaceship and I'll let you know when I'm ready.  
RYAN: Right. Well you'd better hurry, Doctor. That ship's moving toward us.  
DOCTOR [on monitor]: Yes, I know. They're going to invade us.

**[Loading bay]**

(Jamie and Flannigan are in full space suits. The Cyberman and Vallance are
there. Vallance is also suited up.)  
FLANNIGAN: I could not get through the force field to the Operations room, and
I caught this man on the way back.  
CYBERMAN: He is not important.

**[Power room]**

RYAN [on monitor]: Hurry, Doctor. Hurry!  
DOCTOR: Yes, all right.

**[Loading bay]**

(A group of Cybermen are spacewalking to the Wheel. When the Cyberman turns
his back, Flannigan and Jamie approach Vallance, and Jamie puts the metal
plate on the back of his helmet.)  
JAMIE: Got it! Flannigan!  
(The Cyberman walks towards them so Flannigan uses his extinguisher device on
its chest unit. It turns out to be quick drying plastic, and the Cyberman
collapses as it reaches for the door controls. The spacewalking Cybermen are
just paces away as Flannigan shuts the outer doors, but the lead one wedges
itself between them and tries to force them open.)  
JAMIE: Use the plastic again.  
FLANNIGAN: I can't. I wasted it all on the other one.

**[Wheel Operations room]**

DOCTOR [on monitor]: Right. Everything is ready here.  
LERNOV: Ready, Leo.  
RYAN: Red on standby. And fire!  
(The Cybermen's space ship goes KaBOOM!)

**[Loading bay]**

FLANNIGAN: I'll try and operate the neutron force-field. Hold tight!  
(The forcefield repels the Cybermen, and the outer doors close. Flannigan
repressurises the bay and they all remove their helmets.)  
JAMIE: Oh, we've done it.

**[Wheel Operations room]**

CASALI: Earth Central, stand by for emergency report.  
VOICE [OC]: Earth Central. Contract clear. Standing by.  
RYAN: Where's Zoe?  
LERNOV: She's gone to take the Doctor and Jamie back to the rocket.  
VOICE [OC]: Earth Central standing by with recording apparatus. Commence
report.  
RYAN: Hello, Earth Central. This is Captain Ryan, acting controller of Station
Three.  
VOICE [OC]: Recording in progress. Go ahead, Captain.  
RYAN: Preliminary report on communications failure. Radio contact lost at
approximately twelve fifty two hours due to invasion of alien force. Full
report to follow. All systems now operational. Request official permission to
assume responsibility.

**[Rocket control room]**

ZOE: So I've just got to go back?  
JAMIE: I'm afraid so.  
ZOE: And you won't tell me anything about this, what is it?  
JAMIE: Tardis.  
ZOE: Oh, yes. I asked the Doctor what it meant. Time And Relative Dimensions
In Space, he said.  
JAMIE: Er, yes.  
ZOE: But you won't explain it.  
JAMIE: Well, you see Zoe, it's, well, it's like two different worlds. Look,
you've got yours and the Doctor and me have ours.  
DOCTOR [OC]: Jamie!  
JAMIE: Look, you've been. Well, look, Zoe, we won't forget you.

**[Tardis]**

(The Doctor pours the mercury through a funnel into the console, then switches
on.)  
JAMIE: All set?  
DOCTOR: Yes. I've even got some mercury left over.  
JAMIE: Oh, we can go then.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I think  
(The lid of a carved blanket box or chest lowers itself gently.)  
DOCTOR: Just a little matter to settle first, I think, Jamie.  
(The Doctor knocks on the lid and opens it.)  
JAMIE: Hey, I thought I told you  
ZOE: I want to go with you.  
JAMIE: Well, it's impossible.  
DOCTOR: Now, Jamie, it's not impossible. It's something that we have to
decide. You may change your mind.  
ZOE: No, I won't.  
DOCTOR: I wonder. Zoe, watch the screen up there.  
(The Doctor takes a small head piece from behind a roundel and puts it on.)  
JAMIE: What are you going to do?  
DOCTOR: I'm going to show Zoe the sort of thing that she may be in for.  
ZOE: Thought patterns?  
DOCTOR: Yes. Only I'm going to weave them into a complete story for you. Have
you ever heard of the Daleks?  
ZOE: No.  
DOCTOR: Then watch.  
DALEK [on monitor]: Who are you? Who are you? Answer!  
(That is the reprise from episode two of  Evil of the Daleks, which was
repeated on BBC after this story.)  
  
---  
  
<Back to the episode listing

Doctor Who and related marks are trademarks of BBC . Copyright  1963,
Present. The web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment
purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

