

**The Time Warrior**  
  
Original Airdate: 15 Dec, 1973  

__**Part One**__

**[Irongron's hall]**

(As a spaceship streaks through the inky black void, an axe smashes into a
table in the great hall. Two men wearing heavy fur cloaks are seated.)  
IRONGRON: This sheep has been dead a year. Are they trying to poison me?  
BLOODAXE: It is salted.  
IRONGRON: Salted? It stinks! Wine! Must I perish of thirst? Bring me wine!  
(A serving woman pours from a pitcher into his tankard.)  
MEG: 'Tis the dregs of the barrel, Captain. 'Tis the last there is.  
(Irongron tries it and spits it out.)  
IRONGRON: Sour wine! Stinking meat! Sour wine. Is this how I am served?  
BLOODAXE: Our supplies are low, Captain. It's some time since we went
a-foraging.  
IRONGRON: And meanwhile our fine neighbours feast their bellies full on fresh
meat and swill down flagons of fine wine.  
BLOODAXE: Well, Sir Edward's storehouses and cellars are well stocked.  
IRONGRON: Then perhaps we should relieve him of some of his abundance, eh, my
friend? He's a good neighbour. He'll not miss a little of his plenty.  
BLOODAXE: Look!  
(Out of the window a bright light descends straight to Earth.)  
BLOODAXE: Stars are falling!  
IRONGRON: I see only one star.  
(There is a pulsing glow in the distance.)  
IRONGRON: It has fallen in the forest! Come on, get up, you curs. Get up! Get
up!  
(The men stir from where they were sleeping on the floor.)  
BLOODAXE: 'Tis an omen. An evil sign.  
IRONGRON: It is mine. Irongron's star. I will have it! Hurry, fetch the
horses.  
BLOODAXE: Hurry? Hurry where?  
IRONGRON: To find the star before some knave robs me of it. It landed close
by!  
BLOODAXE: But the forest is still in darkness! Who knows what demons may set
upon us?  
IRONGRON: Why, you chicken-hearted knaves, every man of you!  
(Irongron raises his battleaxe at his men, and Bloodaxe restrains him.)  
BLOODAXE: It's but an hour till dawn. Let's wait till then. To wait and see
what faces us. We'll follow you then, Captain.  
IRONGRON: Let all be made ready. I ride at dawn. Alone if need be.  
BLOODAXE: We're with you, Captain.  
IRONGRON: Then bring me some wine. We'll drink a toast to Irongron's Star.

**[Forest]**

(At daybreak the frisky horses carry Irongron and his men to a clearing where
a large metal sphere sits.)  
IRONGRON: A star. A fallen star!  
BLOODAXE: Careful, Captain. Looks like the devil's work to me.  
(A door in the sphere and a squat biped in silver spacesuit and large helmet
with two eye slits comes out. It holds a long rod in one hand.)  
IRONGRON: A warrior. A warrior from the stars! Have you come to challenge me,
sky warrior?  
(Irongron draws his sword and approaches. The spaceman raises a ray gun in its
other hand, fires, and Irongron's sword vanishes.)  
BLOODAXE: Flee for your life, Captain!  
IRONGRON: What creature is this?  
BLOODAXE: 'Tis a devil from hell.  
(It adjusts a device on a belt round its 'waist'.)  
LINX: Peace. Fear not. I shall not harm you.  
IRONGRON: It speaks. Who are you? Where do you come from?  
LINX: I am a Sontaran officer. My name is Linx.  
BLOODAXE: I say he's a Saracen. I have heard tales of his Eastern magic.  
(Linx plants his rod in the ground. A pair of flags pop out of the top. He
salutes it.)  
LINX: By virtue of my authority as an officer of the Army Space Corps, I
hereby claim this planet, its moons and satellites, for the greater glory of
the Sontaran Empire.

**[Irongron's hall]**

(Linx is being held at sword point.)  
IRONGRON: Help you? Why should I help you, star warrior? Why should I not kill
you and take your ship and its treasure for myself?  
LINX: The ship is in need of repair. Even if it were not, you would destroy
yourself should you tamper with it.  
IRONGRON: Then why should I not just slay your for sport? Can you overcome all
of us with your magic?  
LINX: You are a soldier, are you not? A warrior?  
IRONGRON: I took this castle by force of arms. Those that were here before me
I slew. All the countryside around here pays my tribute.  
LINX: Yet no doubt you have enemies. Other warriors who envy your good
fortune.  
IRONGRON: Aye, but they cannot harm me. The King has levied tribute. All their
troops are at the wars.  
LINX: And when they return?  
IRONGRON: Then we shall fight.  
LINX: I can give you weapons. Weapons that can make you master, so that none
dare stand against you. You shall take what castles you will.  
IRONGRON: Magic weapons? Like that, that smote the sword from my hand?  
LINX: Other weapons fitter for your purpose. Weapons that can strike a man
dead from far away. You can be supreme warrior.  
IRONGRON: I can be king. But what do you ask in return, apart from your life?  
LINX: Shelter. A place to conceal my ship and help with its repair. You have
men that can work in metal?  
IRONGRON: An armourer to sharpen weapons, a smith with a forge if these will
serve your need.  
LINX: I need more, much more. There is damage to the drive mechanism of my
ship. I need alloy, skilled technicians, complex circuitry.  
IRONGRON: Oh, we have none of these things of which you speak.  
LINX: Then I must take them from those who have.

**[Makeshift accommodation]**

(A mattress is being rolled out on a metal bed frame. There is a table and
chair and another bed already made.)  
DOCTOR: In here, Brigadier?  
BRIGADIER: Yes, I'm afraid so, Doctor. Not exactly The Ritz, I know, but you
know it's no joke providing emergency accommodation for all these scientists.  
DOCTOR: All right, Brigadier, you've had your little bit of mystification. Now
I know where I'm supposed to stay, perhaps you we don't mind telling me why?  
BRIGADIER: Well, this place is one of the most top secret security
establishments in the whole country. In fact, most of their work's so secret
they don't even know what they're doing themselves.  
DOCTOR: And?  
BRIGADIER: It's also one of the best guarded places in the country. Security
details, alarm systems.  
DOCTOR: I rather gathered that when we arrived. For a moment I thought they
weren't going to let you in.  
BRIGADIER: Yes, exactly. Place is almost too security conscious. That's what
makes it all the more puzzling.  
DOCTOR: Makes what all the more puzzling? Come on, Brigadier, you can tell me.  
BRIGADIER: People vanishing.  
DOCTOR: People?  
BRIGADIER: Well, they've lost half a dozen leading scientists and several
million pounds worth of ultra-secret equipment.  
DOCTOR: What are they working on here, anyway?  
BRIGADIER: Space hardware. New alloys, guidance systems, methods of
propulsion.  
DOCTOR: And what action have you taken so far?  
BRIGADIER: Well, I'd rather a bright idea. It's rather hard to keep an eye on
all these scientist chaps at home, so I had these cubicles put up on several
floors. Confined the whole lot to barracks. All my eggs in one basket, so to
speak.  
DOCTOR: That's fine, so long as no one steals the basket.

**[Linx's workshop]**

(There is a lot of high-tech stuff in here, and men in somewhat grubby but
formerly white lab coats. It is part of the castle, with flagstone floor.
Linx's spaceship has been brought in. A blacksmith brings anachronistic
flintlock rifles for Linx to inspect. Someone hammers on the heavy oak door.)  
BLOODAXE [OC]: Linx? My Lord Linx? Will you open the door?  
LINX: None may enter here. Such was my agreement with your captain.  
BLOODAXE [OC]: Yea, it is my Captain who sends me. He would have words with
you, Lord Linx.  
LINX: Then tell him I am occupied. Now leave me to my work! Insolent
primitives. Did I not need their aid

**[Irongron's hall]**

(Irongron puts an apple on a cabinet.)  
IRONGRON: Where is the star warrior?  
BLOODAXE: He will not come. He says he's occupied.  
IRONGRON: Why, the insolent barbarian. Did I not need his help, I'd. See,
Bloodaxe, the first of the new weapons! Watch!  
(Irongron fires the flintlock and takes a chunk of wood out of the cabinet.)  
BLOODAXE: Oh! Claps the ears!  
IRONGRON: I'll soon master the aim.

**[Makeshift accommodation]**

RUBEISH: Rubeish.  
DOCTOR: I beg your pardon?  
RUBEISH: Joseph Rubeish.  
DOCTOR: Oh, I see. I'm so sorry. Hello. How do you do?  
(The Doctor shakes the younger man's hand. He wears thick glasses, a bow tie
and a white lab coat. The Tardis stands in the corner now.)  
RUBEISH: It's disgraceful, of course. Utterly disgraceful.  
DOCTOR: Oh? What is?  
RUBEISH: Well, shutting us up. Like a lot of kids kept in after school. That
Brigadier chap. Military idiot.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I know how you feel. Still, he means well, you know.  
RUBEISH: Haven't seen my wife and family for three days.  
DOCTOR: I'm sorry to hear that.  
RUBEISH: Ah well, just shows there's always a silver lining. And your name?  
DOCTOR: Er, Smith. Doctor John Smith.  
RUBEISH: Oh. Seems to be a lot of them about today.  
DOCTOR: I'm sorry?  
RUBEISH: Well, I was talking to a young woman just now, also Smith.  
(The door closes.)  
RUBEISH: Well, there she is. Miss Smith?  
SARAH: Yes, Professor?  
RUBEISH: Come and meet your namesake. Miss Lavinia Smith, Doctor er  
DOCTOR: Doctor John Smith. How do you do, Miss Smith?  
SARAH: Hello.  
RUBEISH: Doctor, I'm intrigued. What's that for? (the Tardis)  
DOCTOR: That? Oh, that, er, that contains my equipment, Professor.  
RUBEISH: That's original.  
DOCTOR: You're the virologist, Miss Smith?  
SARAH: Yes. Who told you?  
DOCTOR: I read your paper on the teleological response of the virus. A most
impressive piece of work.  
SARAH: Thank you.  
DOCTOR: Particularly when I realise you must have written it when you were
five years old.  
SARAH: Ah. Er, yes, that is rather difficult to explain, isn't it.  
DOCTOR: But you're going to try, aren't you.  
SARAH: Well, my Aunt Lavinia is in America on a lecture tour, you see.  
DOCTOR: Mmm hmm.  
SARAH: She had an invitation to visit here. I took her place.  
DOCTOR: Why?  
SARAH: Well, I thought all this might give me a good story. I'm a journalist.
Sarah Jane Smith.  
DOCTOR: You realise this is a very dangerous place to be in?  
SARAH: Well I can't help that. I'm stuck here now and anyway, we've got all
these soldiers looking after us. Are you going to give me away, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: I don't think.  
SARAH: Why not?  
DOCTOR: Well, you can make yourself useful. We need somebody around here to
make the coffee.  
SARAH: If you think I'm going to spend my time making cups of coffee for you,
you're very  
DOCTOR: Professor!  
(Rubeish is writing equations on the Tardis.)  
DOCTOR: Look, would you kindly desist? This is not a blackboard, you know?  
RUBEISH: Oh I do beg your pardon, Doctor. I was just trying to prove  
SARAH: What do you plan to do in there?  
DOCTOR: Make myself a cup of coffee. Good day to you.  
(The Doctor goes into the Tardis.)

**[Sir Edward's hall]**

(Over at the magnificent Peckforton Castle - which didn't actually exist
before 1850 but who cares, it really looks the part.)  
ELEANOR: But for how long, Edward? How long are we to tolerate this upstart,
this insolent usurper as our neighbour? He robs, he pillages, he murders. He
flouts your authority every day, the authority which comes from the King.  
EDWARD: Unfortunately, my dear, the King who gave me my authority has taken
away my troops to fight in his interminable wars.  
ELEANOR: Irongron's band is small, and we still have Hal the archer, and one
or two men at arms.  
EDWARD: I have sent letters to all our neighbours. Each, like myself, has but
a mere handful of men yet, if all these handfuls be combined they might yet
make a force that will crush this Irongron.  
ELEANOR: If you will excuse me, my dear, I must give orders for dinner.

**[Irongron's hall]**

(Bloodaxe and two men drag in a young man.)  
BLOODAXE: We caught his little rabbit in the forest, sire.  
IRONGRON: Sir Edward's squire. Are you loyal to your lord, boy?  
ERIC: I am.  
IRONGRON: We shall see.  
BLOODAXE: He carried this. He tried to eat it when we caught him.  
(Bloodaxe unrolls a scroll.)  
IRONGRON: Are Sir Edward's men so ill fed? Bah! I make nothing of their Norman
scribbles. What's it say?  
BLOODAXE: I cannot read, Captain.  
IRONGRON: What's the message say, boy? So your Sir Edward is going to attack
me, eh? Well, speak!  
ERIC: I know nothing.  
IRONGRON: Take him below. We'll loosen his tongue presently.

**[Sir Edward's hall]**

(The candles are lit. A servant girl removes Sir Edward's uneaten meal.)  
ELEANOR: Edward.  
EDWARD: What is it? Is Eric back?  
ELEANOR: You haven't eaten all day.  
EDWARD: Why does he not returned? I could have ridden to my Lord of
Salisbury's castle three times over.  
ELEANOR: It's not good for you to worry so much.  
EDWARD: How can I not worry?  
ELEANOR: Think that tomorrow will be brighter. Edward, I've heard that
Irongron walks his battlements every morning.  
EDWARD: Oh, it pleases him to be high. He's like a cockerel.  
ELEANOR: But does he climb so high that an arrow cannot reach him?

**[Irongron's hall]**

(Irongron is swinging his axe.)  
LINX: Irongron!  
IRONGRON: That strange armour you wear suits you, Linx.  
LINX: It is Sontaran space armour.  
IRONGRON: But why must we never see your face?  
LINX: This helmet conceals the fact that I am not to of your kind, Irongron.
You might not find my true appearance pleasing.  
IRONGRON: By my sword, Linx, I'll wager you're the fairest beauty in the
castle.  
LINX: Why did you summon me? You know my work is pressing.  
IRONGRON: I have a prisoner in the dungeon, a surly fellow who will not speak.  
LINX: And you wish him to?  
IRONGRON: Yes.  
LINX: Then give him to me. I will make him speak.  
IRONGRON: Tell Bloodaxe to bring up the prisoner!  
(A man leaves.)  
IRONGRON: Well, Linx, you cunning old devil, what fresh tricks can you show
Irongron, eh?  
LINX: What is the nature of information you seek?  
IRONGRON: He is a messenger of those who plot a war against me.  
LINX: A war? That is excellent.  
IRONGRON: Oh, so you like a war, eh?  
LINX: Who does not? My race has been at war for millennia. There is not a
galaxy in the universe which our space fleets have not subjugated. But you do
not understand me. I am stranded on this primitive planet when I should be
leading my squadron to glory. I am an expert at war, Irongron.  
IRONGRON: I know. What about those weapons you promised me?  
LINX: Keep your side of the bargain, I shall keep mine. You shall have your
weapons.  
IRONGRON: We make good allies, Linx. Each has much that the other wants.

**[Makeshift accommodation]**

(The Doctor is examining a transparent dome with electronics inside it.)  
RUBEISH: Miss Smith?  
DOCTOR: No, no. I'm the Doctor. You really must keep your glasses on the end
of your nose, Professor.  
RUBEISH: No, no, listen. She's not Miss Smith.  
DOCTOR: She isn't?  
RUBEISH: No. Who is she?  
DOCTOR: I don't think I quite understand what you're talking about, Professor.  
RUBEISH: Well, just now I was in the common room with Sir Maxwell Dingle. I
happened to mention that I was on the same landing with Lavinia Smith the
virologist. And do you know what he said?  
DOCTOR: Yes, he said that she's in America.  
RUBEISH: He said she's in America. How could you know?  
(Rubeish knocks over a cylinder on the table.)  
DOCTOR: Please be careful. This is very delicate equipment.  
RUBEISH: What if she's a spy? What do we do?  
DOCTOR: Shoot her?  
RUBEISH: Ha. Well, there's something odd about her. She even tried to tell me
you were a spy.  
SARAH: Am I on the right floor?  
RUBEISH: Goodnight.  
SARAH: Goodnight, Professor.  
(Rubeish goes into the middle of three cubicles built along the far wall of
the room, and Sarah shuts the main door so the soldiers on guard cannot see
them.)  
SARAH: What's that?  
DOCTOR: That's my alarm clock.  
SARAH: Oh Doctor, kindly don't be so patronising. Now what is it really?  
DOCTOR: It's a rhondium sensor. It detects delta particles. At a preset
spectrum density of fifteen ams, it oscillates this little cylinder there,
which promotes a vacuum in there which wakes me up. Clear?  
SARAH: Well, why do you want to be woken up when it detects delta particles?  
DOCTOR: Because I'm very fond of delta particles. Why do you ask so many
questions?  
SARAH: Because I'm a journalist.  
(The Doctor leans his chair back and puts his feet on the table.)  
SARAH: Are you going to sleep there?  
DOCTOR: If you'll allow me to do so. Good night, Miss Smith.  
(Sarah goes into the cubicle nearest the door. Rubeish comes out of his
cubicle.)  
RUBEISH: Psst. Shouldn't we tell the Brigadier?  
DOCTOR: Tell the Brigadier what?  
RUBEISH: About her.  
DOCTOR: I think we can decide what to do about Miss Smith in the morning,
Professor. If we're all still here.

**[Irongron's hall]**

(Eric is dragged in.)  
BLOODAXE: He has stout-heart, this one, sire. He speaks not a word.  
IRONGRON: Good. A fair measure for you, Linx.  
(Linx takes his ray gun and points it at Eric, who stops cringing.)  
IRONGRON: Well, come on, Linx. Have at him.  
LINX: Ask what you wish.  
IRONGRON: Eh? But you've done nothing.  
LINX: This is a key. I have unlocked your prisoner's mind. Question him.  
IRONGRON: How many men guard Sir Edward's castle?  
ERIC: There are but ten, old men for the most part.  
IRONGRON: And he plans to attack me with ten old men?  
ERIC: He sends messages to raise a force against you. If he succeed, then he
will attack.  
IRONGRON: Listen to the fellow. He cannot stop babbling. Stay, Linx! Have I
given you leave?  
(With a slight adjustment, Linx's ray gun cuts the axe head off it's handle.)  
LINX: Each of us has work to do, Irongron. I will be back.  
(Linx leaves.)  
IRONGRON: By my sword, Bloodaxe, I'll pickle that insolent star warrior in
boiling oil one day. Insolent dog!

**[Makeshift accommodation]**

(The Doctor is snoring in his chair when the detector starts thrumming. He
wakes and checks a 'compass' nearby.)  
DOCTOR: Rubeish?  
(The Doctor knocks on Rubeish's door.)  
DOCTOR: Rubeish!  
RUBEISH [OC]: What? Who is it?  
DOCTOR: Oh, it's all right. Nothing to worry about. Just checking.  
(Sarah enters.)  
SARAH: What's happening?  
DOCTOR: You're asking questions again.  
(The thrumming gets louder and faster. There is a crash.)  
SARAH: Professor Rubeish?  
DOCTOR: Rubeish!

**[Rubeish's cubicle]**

SARAH: He's gone!  
DOCTOR: Yes, but he was here a moment ago.  
SARAH: Well, he can't have gone far. He's as blind as a bat without his
glasses.

**[Makeshift accommodation]**

The Doctor picks up a Geiger counter cum torch from the desk.)  
DOCTOR: You stay here, Miss Smith. I'm going to check the landing.

**[Corridor]**

DOCTOR: Anybody come out here just now?  
SOLDIER: No.  
(The Doctor goes over to the stairs and turns on his detector. It beeps very
quickly and the pitch climbs. As it points to the turn in the stairs the
ghostly figure of Linx appears. One of the soldiers shoots at it and it fades
away, leaving a bullet hole in the wood panelling behind. The beeping stops.)

**[Makeshift accommodation]**

SARAH: What were they shooting at?  
DOCTOR: Shadows.  
SARAH: Oh, come on, Doctor. Stop treating me like a child.  
DOCTOR: I can't understand why the definition was so low. Unless he's
operating with a very weak power source at maximum range. Yes, of course.  
BRIGADIER [OC]: Doctor!  
(Sarah goes into her cubicle and the Doctor into the Tardis. The Brigadier
enters.)  
BRIGADIER: Doctor?  
DOCTOR [OC]: Hello?  
BRIGADIER: Look, Doctor, we've had a raid. Is everyone present on this
landing?  
(The Doctor comes out carrying a large case.)  
DOCTOR: No. Professor Rubeish is missing.  
BRIGADIER: Oh, my giddy aunt. The Minister will go spare. Did you see
anything, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
BRIGADIER: What?  
DOCTOR: Well, I thought I saw a man in armour.  
BRIGADIER: A man in armour?  
DOCTOR: Mmm hmm.  
BRIGADIER: You mean, old-fashioned armour? You mean a ghost?  
DOCTOR: Oh, I very much doubt it. Sorry I can't stop, Brigadier.  
(The Doctor packs away his detector.)  
BRIGADIER: Why? Where are you going?  
DOCTOR: Well, I've got to get on the trail while it's still warm.  
BRIGADIER: What trail? The chap's just vanished.  
DOCTOR: Oh no he hasn't. I just got a fix on him. There's something very odd
indeed going on.  
BRIGADIER: Yes, well, if I may say so, Doctor, that is not exactly news to me.  
DOCTOR: Someone's operating a matter transmitter. And the really odd thing is,
there's a time transference too. It's being worked from several centuries ago.
Past and present mixed up. Very interesting, that.  
(Sarah is at the open Tardis door.)  
SARAH: (sotto) Professor Rubeish, are you in there?  
(Sarah enters the Tardis.)  
DOCTOR: Well, I can't stay here chatting, old boy. Got to get after Rubeish.  
BRIGADIER: Look, Doctor, I forbid you to go off in that contraption. There's
no telling where you'll finish up. Remember what happened to you on Metebelis
Three.  
DOCTOR: Well, I got there, didn't I?  
BRIGADIER: Yes, eventually, after several detours.  
DOCTOR: Brigadier, a straight line may be the shortest distance between two
points, but it is by no means the most interesting. Goodbye, old chap.  
(The Doctor enters the Tardis.)  
BRIGADIER: But Doc  
(The Tardis dematerialises.)

**[Forest]**

(Irongron walks his battlements, watched by an archer. Say Hi to  Jeremy
Bulloch, before Star Wars. The Tardis materialises nearby.)  
DOCTOR: Well done, old girl. Absolutely on target. For once.  
(The Doctor walks off, and Sarah comes out of the Tardis, baffled.)  
SARAH: It's still only a police box. I must find a telephone.

**[Irongron's castle battlements]**

IRONGRON: Sir Edward only has a puny force. He stands within his walls. If
only we can breach them, Bloodaxe!  
BLOODAXE: We could cut Sir Edward's soldiers down in less time than our rogues
spend with their breakfasts.  
IRONGRON: It's those accursed walls, walls like these! But with Linx's new
weapons

**[Forest]**

(The archer is taking aim.)  
SARAH: Excuse me, could you tell me where the nearest telephone  
(He looses his arrow and runs.)

**[Irongron's hall]**

(The arrow thuds into a door just behind Irongron. Close, but not close
enough.)  
BLOODAXE: He flees through the forest. Take him! After him, you dogs! Through
the forest!

**[Outside Irongron's hall]**

SARAH: Oh, it must be some sort of pageant. I say! Hey, you there!  
(One of the men grabs her arm.)  
SARAH: Hey! What are you doing? Get off! Let go! Hey.  
(Sarah is dragged back to the castle, protesting.)  
DOCTOR: How the blazes did she get here?

**[Irongron's castle courtyard]**

SARAH: Stop it! Look, if this is a rag day joke, it's not funny!  
MAN: Come on.  
SARAH: Let me go! I won't tell you  
(Sarah is dragged away, and the Doctor enters the now empty courtyard. A twig
snaps and he ducks behind a cart loaded with barrels as Linx comes out a
doorway, then stops. The Doctor sees him and nods to himself. Thinking he is
unobserved, Linx removes his large helmet to reveal that his head really does
fill it all along with his slit of a mouth, little eyes and no neck.)

__**Part Two**__

**[Irongron's hall]**

(Another group of Irongron's men have caught the archer and are dragging him
into the courtyard. Linx puts his helmet back on and the Doctor makes for
another doorway out of sight. Inside, an axe is being sharpened on a
grindstone.)  
IRONGRON: Make it keen. I want Sir Edward not to know the moment when his head
is parted from his shoulders. What's this?  
SARAH: Let go!  
BLOODAXE: She was found within bowshot, Captain!  
SARAH: Idiots! Why don't you stop this ridiculous pantomime.  
IRONGRON: Ah, she spits fire, eh, Bloodaxe? Come here, girl.  
SARAH: Get lost.  
(Irongron rips a chain from around Sarah's neck.)  
IRONGRON: She wears gold, Bloodaxe.  
SARAH: That hurt, you fool!  
IRONGRON: You call Irongron a fool? I'll have the marrow from your bones, my
little chicken. Now, where are you from?  
SARAH: Look, just pack this up, will you. It's not funny. I happen to be a
reporter and I've got a big story  
IRONGRON: Take her away, Bloodaxe. Throw her in the dungeon.  
SARAH: Why don't you take off that ridiculous gear and go home to your
butcher's shop. Let go! Look, I warn you, any more of this and I'm going
straight to the police.  
IRONGRON: Stay, Bloodaxe!  
BLOODAXE: Captain.  
IRONGRON: Leave her.  
SARAH: That's better. Huh. Now, if I could just use your telephone.  
(There is a shout outside, and the archer is dragged in.)  
BLOODAXE: This is the dog that shot at you, Captain.  
IRONGRON: So you thought to kill Irongron, eh?  
HAL: Aye, and I would, but for her. She drew my aim aside.  
IRONGRON: You treacherous dog! Did Sir Edward send you?  
HAL: No.  
IRONGRON: You lie.  
HAL: I speak the truth.  
IRONGRON: If not Sir Edward, who then?  
SARAH: I don't understand. Where am I?  
HAL: It was my Lady Eleanor.  
IRONGRON: Ah, that narrow-hipped vixen. Bloodaxe, tomorrow we dine at Wessex
Castle.  
BLOODAXE: Yes, Captain. And what of the prisoner?  
IRONGRON: Ere long we shall deal with him sharply.  
(Hal is dragged away. Irongron sits down at his dining table.)  
IRONGRON: Sharply, eh? 'Tis richly put.  
BLOODAXE: Aye, that'll be a fine jest, Captain Irongron.  
IRONGRON: I'm not one of your stuffy Norman nobles. I like a bit of rough fun.  
BLOODAXE: 'Tis true Captain, you have a merry wit indeed.  
SARAH: Look, please. Now you've had your laugh, now, you know, just let's stop
it and let's talk sensibly. I mean, if it's any consolation to you, you're
scaring me out of my wits.  
BLOODAXE: Perhaps the wench is crazed, Captain.  
SARAH: Oh, come on. What is this place?  
IRONGRON: You are in the castle of Irongron, my lady. Few uninvited guests
come here and few that do leave alive.  
SARAH: All right, if you insist on playing guessing games. Now, it's not a
village pageant, it's too elaborate for that. A film set. No. No, no lights,
no cameras.  
IRONGRON: Aye, the wench is crazed right enough. A pity. She is not uncomely.  
SARAH: I've got it! It's one of those tourist places. A medieval castle all
restored to its original condition, with jolly banquets and buxom serving
wenches. That's it, isn't it? Mind you, I think you've overdoing the sordid
realism a bit. I mean, I know things were a bit grotty in the Middle Ages,
but, really, you might leave the tourists a bit of glamorous illusion. I've
never seen such a scurvy, smelly  
IRONGRON: For pity's sake, cease this babbling, girl!  
BLOODAXE: Captain!  
(Linx enters with a box.)  
IRONGRON: Ah, Linx. What of my weapons. Are they ready?  
LINX: Soon. But I have another weapon to show you.  
BLOODAXE: For your leave, master. The prisoner.  
IRONGRON: Aye, aye.  
(Bloodaxe leaves. Linx sees Sarah.)  
LINX: What is this?  
IRONGRON: Eh? Oh, just a girl taken in the forest.  
LINX: Girl? You have two species on this planet?  
IRONGRON: How say you?  
LINX: The girl is not of your kind, Irongron. The hair is finer, the thorax of
a different construction.  
IRONGRON: Oh, hell's teeth, have you no girls beyond the stars? No women to do
the lowly work?  
LINX: Ah, I understand. You have a primary and secondary reproductive cycle.
It is an inefficient system, you should change it.  
IRONGRON: You what?  
LINX: At the Sontaran Military Academy, we have hatchings of a million cadets
at each muster parade. Thus we can sustain enormous casualties on all battle
fronts.  
IRONGRON: Linx, you cluck away like a broody old hen.  
LINX: Wait. This cloth is machine woven. The girl is not of your time,
Irongron.  
IRONGRON: Curse the girl, show me the weapon.  
(Linx uses his ray device on Sarah.)  
LINX: Who? What? How?  
SARAH: Sarah Jane Smith, reporter. In a machine. I did not understand it.  
LINX: What century?  
SARAH: Twentieth.  
LINX: Your civilisation know nothing about time dimensional technology.
Explain.  
SARAH: I cannot. It is a machine that belongs to someone called the Doctor.  
IRONGRON: Linx  
LINX: Silence! This is important. My mission is threatened. Explain the
Doctor.  
SARAH: He is a scientist. He was at the research centre. He said he was very
fond of delta particles.  
LINX: Ah. Is he here?  
SARAH: Yes, somewhere. I was hiding in the machine as he left.  
LINX: It becomes clear.  
IRONGRON: Linx, what of the weapon?  
LINX: Very well. It is here.  
(Linx uses the control box and a knight in armour walks stiff-legged into the
hall.)  
IRONGRON: Who are you? How do you come into my castle? Well, speak, fellow!
Answer me or lose your head for insolence!  
LINX: It cannot answer you. It is just a suit of steel. It is empty.  
IRONGRON: But it walks.  
LINX: It walks and it fights! Irongron, is it a good weapon?  
IRONGRON: Does it kill?  
LINX: It does nothing else and it cannot be killed.  
IRONGRON: By heavens, Linx, can you make me more of these?  
LINX: If you wish.  
(Sarah quietly sneaks out of the hall.)  
IRONGRON: With a few such soldiers as that, I could take the world!  
LINX: When I have left this dull planet, it would amuse me to think of it
under the rule of King Irongron. Very well, provide me with all that I ask for
and I can make many more of these.  
IRONGRON: It's a bargain. By heavens, Linx, I never thought when I first saw
you that I should come to love you as a brother. Now, show me how the iron man
works!  
LINX: Wait. The girl creature has gone.  
IRONGRON: Oh, she'll not get far before one of my guards grabs her tail. Now,
show me. Show me how it fights. Make it walk again.  
(Linx makes the robot turn and hit the table with its sword again and again.)

**[Irongron's castle passageway]**

(Sarah and the Doctor meet, but Sarah runs off.)  
DOCTOR: Sarah? Miss Smith. Come back!  
(The Doctor has to hide as Hal is dragged through. When it is clear, he goes
up a small staircase.)

**[Irongron's castle courtyard]**

(Hal's neck is placed on the chopping block, and Bloodaxe prepares to do the
dirty deed.)  
IRONGRON: Stay! Bloodaxe!  
BLOODAXE: Sire!  
IRONGRON: Would you fight for your life, fellow?  
HAL: I'll fight any man, my lord.  
(Irongron brings out the robot.)  
IRONGRON: Then stand against Irongron's champion.  
BLOODAXE: Who is this?  
IRONGRON: You'll see some sport now, Bloodaxe. Here, fellow.  
(Irongron gives Hal his bow and arrows.)  
BLOODAXE: Master, this is not fair combat to pitch knight against bowman. At
this close range his arrows'll pierce the armour's weak points.  
IRONGRON: Take aim, fellow.  
HAL: I am that.  
IRONGRON: Your freedom if you kill him. Stand back!  
BLOODAXE: Your champion'll have more arrows in his gizzard than a thistle has
spikes.  
(Irongron sets the robot's sword arm swinging as he advances. Hal's arrow
strikes right where his throat should be.)  
BLOODAXE: My lord, look! He still moves!  
(Above, the Doctor enters the battlements. Hal plants another arrow in the
robot's heart. Unseen by the laughing sentries, the Doctor picks up a crossbow
and, as Hal falls back over a barrel, the Doctor shoots the control box out of
Irongron's hand.)  
IRONGRON: What fool?  
(The robot stops and turns on Irongron.)  
BLOODAXE: Guard your back, my lord!  
(Hal scurries behind a cart.)  
BLOODAXE: Captain!  
(Bloodaxe throws the headsman's axe to Irongron. Sarah gestures to Hal to
follow her, and he does. Irongron knocks the robot's helm off. It takes a few
more steps then trips over a pile of straw and lies there, flailing with its
sword.)  
IRONGRON: By heavens, Bloodaxe. 'Tis like a tin tadpole. You cut off its head
and yet it wriggles. I'll have a word with Linx about this.  
(Sarah and Hal run through the main gate and away.)

**[Linx's workshop]**

(Linx has taken his helmet off again. He presses a button on a control panel
then steps up to supervise his captive scientists. The Doctor's face appears
at a grille in the wall.)  
IRONGRON [OC]: Linx? Linx, you mongrel! I have a bone to pick with you! Come
here!  
LINX: I am occupied, Irongron.  
IRONGRON: What! Out this minute or I'll burst the door down.  
(The lock gives way and Irongron bursts in.)  
LINX: Well? What is it you need to say to me? Didn't I tell you you might not
find my face pleasing?  
IRONGRON: Aye. And never was truer word spoken. Are they all so fair of face
beyond the stars?  
LINX: The variety of sentient life forms is infinite. Do you think your
primitive features are pleasing to me? Well, what is it you want?  
IRONGRON: That accursed iron warrior of yours.  
LINX: You are pleased with it?  
IRONGRON: Some knave with a crossbow shot the control from my hand. The iron
man became crazed, tried to kill all of us.  
LINX: Perhaps the hand control unit itself is a weakness. I will make you a
better warrior, Irongron. One that'll obey your voice perhaps.  
IRONGRON: First, help me kill the one I have now. It still struggles to slay
my knaves.  
LINX: It cannot be killed. It was never alive. Come. I will de-activate it.  
(Linx and Irongron leave. The Doctor pulls the rusted grille from the wall and
climbs down a handy ladder from the aqueduct or drain which runs on pillars
across the room. He looks inside Linx's spaceship, then approaches a man in
striped pajamas.)  
DOCTOR: Professor Morrison? Professor?  
(Morrison does not notice him. Irongron's smith puts more muskets on the
table.)  
DOCTOR: Absolute lunacy.  
(The Doctor goes over to the console Linx was using.)  
DOCTOR: Rubeish!  
RUBEISH: What? Who is it?  
DOCTOR: It's me, it's the Doctor. Don't you remember? We were on the same
landing at the research centre.  
RUBEISH: Oh, my dear fellow. So he's got you too, has he?  
DOCTOR: No, hardly. Look, Professor. What's wrong with all these people?  
RUBEISH: Hypnotised. Can't get a word out of them. Rotten company.  
DOCTOR: Well, you seem to be all right?  
RUBEISH: Oh, didn't work with me. Strong-minded, you see.  
DOCTOR: Yes, and very nearly blind.  
RUBEISH: Oh, nonsense.  
DOCTOR: Obviously working some sort of ocular device. Professor, have you any
idea where you are?  
RUBEISH: Some medieval English castle, I suspect. I've been feeling the
carvings on some of theses columns. They're astonishingly well preserved.  
DOCTOR: Yes, well, you're in a castle all right. But do you know the time?  
RUBEISH: About four in the afternoon. We haven't had breakfast yet, you know.
Doesn't feed us much. Once a day if we're lucky.  
DOCTOR: Now Professor, listen to me. This may come as a shock to you, so steel
yourself. You have been brought back to the early years of the Middle Ages.  
RUBEISH: That's interesting. I've always maintained that the loop theory of
time shouldn't have been so arrogantly dismissed by Crabshaw and his cronies.  
DOCTOR: Yes, well, tell me about it some other time, will you? We've got to
get out of here before Linx comes back.  
RUBEISH: Oh, not yet, Doctor. Why, this is the opportunity of a lifetime. Do
you know, there's some very interesting work being done here. If only I could
see it all properly.  
DOCTOR: Look, Professor, your life is in considerable danger, I must insist
that you  
RUBEISH: You go if you want to, Doctor. Go on, but leave me alone.  
DOCTOR: Professor, don't you understand?  
(Linx enters.)  
LINX: Stop! You are the one called the Doctor?  
DOCTOR: You know who I am?  
LINX: I have been expecting you. Why did you follow me to this time?  
DOCTOR: To prevent your interference with the affairs of Earth. Don't you
realise the harm that you'll cause?  
LINX: This primitive planet and it's affairs are of no importance.  
DOCTOR: That's a typically Sontaran attitude.  
LINX: Only one thing matters. To complete the repairs to my ship and return to
the glorious war that is my destiny. Nothing must interfere with that.
Nothing, and nobody.  
(Linx uses his ray weapon on the Doctor.)

**[Sir Edward's hall]**

HAL: I vouch for her, my lord. Without her help I would not be here.  
ELEANOR: She looks like one I would trust. Sit, child. Tell us where you're
from.  
SARAH: I can't. It's too difficult to explain.  
EDWARD: The manner of her dress is strange, and the manner of her speech.  
HAL: There is much strange at Irongron's castle, Sir Edward. I told you of the
knight that fights on, though it should be dead. And one of the guards told me
there's a man from the stars that lives among them. A mighty wizard who makes
magic weapons.  
EDWARD: A man from the stars? I've heard it said he has the help of devils and
magicians.  
HAL: It is true, Sir Edward! I have seen it!  
SARAH: Well, I know who's helping him. It's the Doctor.  
ELEANOR: The Doctor?  
SARAH: Ah, well, that's what he calls himself, but he's no magician. Just some
eccentric scientist.  
EDWARD: What does she say?  
ELEANOR: The words are strange, but I know her meaning. Who is this Doctor?
What do you know of him?  
SARAH: Scientists, learned men. They're being taken from the place I come
from, and I believe that the Doctor is bringing them here and handing them
over to Irongron.  
ELEANOR: What would Irongron want with these wizards?  
HAL: To make him magic weapons, my lady. Irongron thinks only of war and
conquest.  
EDWARD: Anything that makes Irongron strong can work only to our harm.  
HAL: With an army of magic knights such as I fought, Irongron could conquer
the whole kingdom. Well, who knows what other sorceries he may soon have at
his command?  
SARAH: I'm sure the Doctor's the key to it all. He was there when one of the
scientists was taken. He has a machine that can travel through time. Well, it
must be him, and somehow we've got to stop him.  
EDWARD: If he's Irongron's ally, he sits safe within Irongron's walls. There's
naught we can do.  
SARAH: Oh, there's always something you can do. It' s just a matter of working
out what.  
EDWARD: Brave speech.  
HAL: She has the heart of a lion, sire. I saw her give Irongron the sharp edge
of her tongue.  
EDWARD: If I had an army of girls such as you, I might hold this castle
forever. As it is, how can I fight Irongron and this Doctor?  
SARAH: All right, I'll tell you how. Now, the first thing we must do is grab
the Doctor and get him away from Irongron.  
EDWARD: And force him to make his magic for me? Ah ha, good thought. Aye, but
how could it be done?  
SARAH: Oh, what's wrong with you? All it needs is a sort of commando raid. You
knock out the sentries, rush into the castle, grab the Doctor and away. Well,
you've got soldiers, haven't you?  
EDWARD: A handful. A raid? A bold plan.  
HAL: I'll go, Sir Edward.

**[Linx's workshop]**

LINX: You resisted well, Doctor. I could have increased the power, but I might
have killed you. I need you alive. A brain of your capacity can be of use to
me.  
DOCTOR: Thank you.  
LINX: You're not of this planet. How came you to be here?  
DOCTOR: Oh, I'm just a tourist. I like it here.  
LINX: This hole in space.  
DOCTOR: You haven't seen it at its best.  
LINX: It has no military value, no strategic significance.  
DOCTOR: Once again, a Sontaran philosophy.  
LINX: I'm Commander Linx - Fifth Sontaran Army Space Fleet.  
DOCTOR: Ah, yes. Yes, as I thought. A Sontaran warrior. So, the perpetual war
between the Sontarans and the Rutans has spread to this tiny planet, has it?  
LINX: Emergency landing. I was on a reconnaissance mission when I was attacked
by a squadron of Rutan fighters. You have encountered my race before, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Unfortunately.  
LINX: I'll overlook that insult for the moment. What is your native planet?  
DOCTOR: Gallifrey. I am a Time Lord.  
LINX: Ah, yes. A race of great technical achievement, but lacking the morale
to withstand a determined assault.  
DOCTOR: Oh, do you think so?  
LINX: I'm only a lowly Commander, Doctor. I merely quote from the appreciation
circulated by our military intelligence.  
DOCTOR: Yes, well, you'd be well advised never to put that appreciation to the
test, Linx.  
LINX: My only ambition at the moment is to return to my squadron. You can be
of value to me. You can help me to repair this ship.  
DOCTOR: You seem to have acquired some help all ready.  
LINX: Primitives. I adapted my ship's frequency modulator and projected myself
forward as far as I could. Unfortunately I only had the power to reach the
twentieth century.  
DOCTOR: From which you stole the equipment and the skilled help you couldn't
find here.  
LINX: Yes. But the work goes slowly.  
DOCTOR: Commander Linx, if you will return these people to their own time I
might possibly consider helping you.  
LINX: Do not attempt to bargain with me, Doctor! Take that seat there by the
controls. Move!  
DOCTOR: You're interfering with human evolution, Linx. Don't you realise the
damage that you're going to do to them?  
LINX: I have no interest in human evolution.  
(Linx puts a headset with a big round ball at the top on the Doctor's head.)  
LINX: I'm placing you under autocontrol, Doctor, to ensure your complete
cooperation.  
DOCTOR: Human beings must be allowed to develop at their own pace. At this
period, they're just a few steps from barbarism.  
LINX: You will monitor progress rates on the input panel against the
programmer. Now I must leave you in charge for a time.  
(Linx switches on the headset, puts on his own headset and picks up the
rifles.)  
DOCTOR: You give them breech-loading guns now, they'll have atomic weapons by
the seventeenth century. They'll have the capability to destroy their own
planet before they're civilised enough to handle it.  
(A crackle of electricity comes down to the ball on the Doctor's headset. He
flinches in pain.)  
LINX: You would do well to concentrate on the task I have given you, Doctor.
Answer the programmer.  
(Linx leaves. The Doctor thumps various buttons on the console. He tries to
touch the headset and gets another jolt for his effort. Slumping downwards in
the chair has the same effect.)

**[Irongron's castle - postern gate]**

(The commando raid is on, and the first sentry is taken care of. Sarah is
dressed in lincoln green and brown clothes now.)  
HAL: I still say this is no work for women.  
SARAH: Oh, I wouldn't have missed this for anything. Anyway, I'm the only one
who knows what the Doctor looks like. Come on, this way.

**[Irongron's hall]**

(Irongron picks up a weapon and cocks the firing pin.)  
IRONGRON: Ah, now these are more to my taste than your iron man, Linx.  
LINX: I will still prefect the fighting robot for your army, Irongron.  
IRONGRON: We'll take these weapons to the men, Bloodaxe and I will instruct
them in their use. Tomorrow morning, at dawn, we march on Sir Edward's castle.  
BLOODAXE: Yes, Captain.  
IRONGRON: By sunset he'll be feeding the crows.  
(Outside the window, Sarah and Hal have heard everything.)

**[Linx's workshop]**

DOCTOR: Rubeish! Professor, over here quickly.  
RUBEISH: Is that you, Doctor? I thought you were going?  
DOCTOR: A change of plan, old chap. Look, I want your help.  
RUBEISH: Are you wearing a hat?  
DOCTOR: Look, behind me you'll find a panel. There's a switch on it.  
RUBEISH: It's dangerous, you know. Overheats the brain. Panel. Oh yes, I've
got it.  
DOCTOR: Right, turn the switch.  
RUBEISH: Always thought that's why judges are so peculiar. It's those wigs
they wear.  
(Zap!)  
DOCTOR: No! No! That's the wrong. No, man!  
RUBEISH: Sorry. I do wish I'd brought my glasses.  
DOCTOR: Yes, so do I. It was the wrong one.  
RUBEISH: Is this the one?  
(Click and no zap. The Doctor slumps right down in the chair then takes the
headset off.)  
DOCTOR: Yes, that was the one. Thank you very much indeed, Professor.  
RUBEISH: Not at all, Smith.  
DOCTOR: Smith. Yes, of course. Look, will you excuse me? I've got to go and
find a young girl. I'll see you later, I hope.  
RUBEISH: Young girl? I should have thought he was a bit old for that sort of
thing. Oh well.

**[Irongron's castle passage]**

(The Doctor walks into Irongron and Bloodaxe.)  
DOCTOR: Ah, good evening.  
(The Doctor holds out his hand. Bloodaxe takes it, the Doctor pulls him
forward and down, and Irongron trips over him.)  
IRONGRON: Get after him! Call the guards!

**[Irongron's castle courtyard]**

IRONGRON: Catch him!  
(The Doctor dodges around various men at arms but can't actually get away from
them. Finally he falls backwards onto a pile of hay by the horse trough.)  
IRONGRON: He who strikes Irongron dies!

__**Part Three**__

**[Irongron's castle courtyard]**

(While the Doctor is still evading the men at arms, Hal and Sarah watch from
the battlements.)  
HAL: Look, they try to kill their wizard.  
SARAH: Quick, we need him alive!  
(Hal draws his bow as the Doctor falls and Irongron lifts his axe.)  
IRONGRON: He who strikes Irongron dies!  
(The momentum from Hal's arrow hitting the wooden shaft pushes the axe from
Irongron's hand. The Doctor gets up and runs.)  
SARAH: Doctor! Up here!  
(The Doctor runs into the entrance to the stairway, and blocks it with a bale
of hay. He runs up the stairs then throws a flaming torch down onto the hay,
stopping Irongron and his men in their tracks.)

**[Irongron's castle battlements]**

DOCTOR: Thank you very much, Miss Smith. A most timely rescue.  
SARAH: This isn't a rescue, Doctor, it's a capture. Let's get him out of here.  
(Down in his laboratory, Linx discovers that the Doctor is gone. Rubeish keeps
out of sight until the door slams shut again, then returns to his task of
grinding a magnifying glass into a monocle for himself.)

**[Irongron's hall]**

(Irongron and Bloodaxe are eating.)  
IRONGRON: The fellow has the gall of a camel and the cunning of a fox.  
BLOODAXE: Aye, you shall have your revenge, Captain. He'll be with Sir Edward
now. And not even a rat'll come out of that castle alive tomorrow.  
IRONGRON: By the stars, Bloodaxe, I swear I'll chop him up so fine not even a
sparrow will fill its beak at one peck.  
(Linx enters. Meg leaves.)  
LINX: One of my workers has disappeared. Order a search of your castle  
IRONGRON: If you've lost one of your dumb, whey-faced ninnies, Linx, then look
for him yourself. My men are at rest.  
BLOODAXE: We march upon Sir Edward within the hour.  
LINX: I insist upon a search, Irongron. The Doctor is of great value to me.
And while he is at large, he could be dangerous.  
BLOODAXE: The Doctor?  
IRONGRON: Bother me now, little toad, and you will feel an axe in your skull.  
BLOODAXE: Master, I heard somebody call Doctor while we were at that fellow's
heels.  
IRONGRON: Is this Doctor a long shank rascal with a mighty nose?  
LINX: That is how he would appear in human eyes.  
IRONGRON: Then he is no longer here. Sir Edward sent raiders to my castle,
captured him.  
LINX: He has escaped!

**[Sir Edward's hall]**

SARAH: Tell Sir Edward we're back.  
SERVANT: Yes.  
SARAH: Now  
DOCTOR: You've been getting around, Sarah. Are you on visiting terms with all
the local nobility?  
SARAH: Doctor, let's get a few things straight, shall we?  
DOCTOR: Oh dear. You know, I'm afraid you're going to be awfully confused if
you ask me to explain about the Tardis.  
SARAH: The Tardis?  
DOCTOR: Yes, my police box. You were a stowaway, I imagine.  
SARAH: Yes, but we'll come to that later. Now then, why are you helping
Irongron?  
DOCTOR: My dear girl, I'm not helping him. Linx is. I'm trying to stop him.  
SARAH: Linx?  
DOCTOR: Yes, perhaps you're lucky enough not to have met him yet. Nasty,
brutish and short just about sums him up.  
SARAH: There was a strange looking knight with Irongron.  
DOCTOR: Yes, well, he'd have looked even stranger if he hadn't been wearing
space armour. He comes from a planet where the surface gravity is many times
than of Earth.  
SARAH: A man from the stars?  
DOCTOR: Mmm hmm.  
SARAH: How do I know you're telling the truth?  
DOCTOR: Because I never lie. Well, hardly ever. You ever heard of UNIT?  
SARAH: You work for UNIT?  
DOCTOR: In an advisory capacity, yes. Well, they asked me to look into this
question of the missing scientists for them.  
SARAH: But I thought you were responsible for that.  
DOCTOR: My dear girl, I don't go around kidnapping scientists. No, Linx
brought them here to staff his workshop. Now I've got to find a way of sending
them back to there own time.  
(Lady Eleanor and Sir Edward enter.)  
ELEANOR: This is the magician?  
SARAH: Er, yes. This is the Doctor.  
EDWARD: You have done well, Sarah.  
DOCTOR: How do you do? It is a pleasure and a privilege to be in the company
of civilised people at last.  
EDWARD: A courtly rogue.  
ELEANOR: Is he willing to change his allegiance and serve Sir Edward instead
of Irongron?  
SARAH: Well, he says he wasn't serving Irongron, and there is another stranger
at the castle. Someone called Linx.  
DOCTOR: Yes, he's your enemy, I assure you, not me. We'd be well advised to
join forces against him.  
EDWARD: Does he speak truth?  
SARAH: I'm not sure. I suppose I could have been wrong.  
DOCTOR: That's a generous admission. Especially coming from one of the fair
sex.  
SARAH: Or he could just be changing sides to save his own skin.  
ELEANOR: These wizards and warlocks were ever a treacherous breed. We'd best
be wary of him.  
EDWARD: I shall spare your life, if you cast your spells and incantations to
help me against Irongron, Doctor. Refuse and you die.  
DOCTOR: You offer a somewhat restricted choice, Sir Edward.  
EDWARD: What is your answer?  
DOCTOR: My services are at your disposal, sir. Such as they are.  
EDWARD: Good. Serve me straight, Doctor, and I shall reward you well.  
HAL: Oh, master. Oh but master, Irongron marches here before noon! We heard
this said from his own mouth.  
EDWARD: Then we are lost. We cannot stand against them.  
DOCTOR: On the contrary, sir, I think we can.  
EDWARD: But how? With a handful of men?  
DOCTOR: Yes sir, with just a few men I think I can persuade Irongron that we
have a full garrison.  
EDWARD: By the use of your magic?  
DOCTOR: By creating an illusion, anyway.  
EDWARD: Your magic will have to be powerful indeed to discourage Irongron.  
DOCTOR: It will be, sir.

**[Irongron's hall]**

(Irongron is having his armour fitted on him.)  
BLOODAXE: The men are ready, Captain.  
IRONGRON: Good. Though for such an easy conquest as this, 'tis scarce worth
strapping on armour. You and I alone, good Bloodaxe, could take that castle.  
BLOODAXE: Indeed we could, Captain.  
IRONGRON: With Sir Edward's treasure I shall hire more men, and with Linx's
weapons to arm them, who shall stand against us?  
(Linx enters.)  
LINX: When does the fighting start, Irongron?  
IRONGRON: In the time it takes to ride from here to Sir Edward's castle.  
LINX: Then I shall come with you.  
IRONGRON: What, you? Oh Bloodaxe, on my oath, can you see that on a scaling
ladder?  
LINX: I have an interest in seeing the battle.  
IRONGRON: Those eyes have thirst for blood. Well, find our bold warrior a
horse, Bloodaxe. Come, then.

**[Sir Edward's castle - workroom]**

(The Doctor is mixing a bowl of yellow gunk. He has several small sacking bags
filled with something and tied. Sarah enters with a soldier's helmet on a pole
and some more small bags.)  
SARAH: Here's a few more for you, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Thank you, Sarah.  
SARAH: Lady Eleanor's got every serving wench in the castle sewing away like
mad.  
DOCTOR: I told you there'd be plenty of work for everybody, didn't I?  
SARAH: Oh. Typically masculine arrangement, though. We do all the dirty work,
you get all the fun.  
DOCTOR: You don't think mixing this singularly noxious compound is fun, do
you? How's the rest of it going?  
SARAH: Not bad. I put Sir Edward in charge of painting the dummies' faces and
he's turned out to be quite an artist. Once I'd set him on the right lines.  
DOCTOR: Excellent. I'm glad I decided to let you stay.  
SARAH: You decided?  
DOCTOR: You know, I was never much of a hand with a paint brush myself.  
SARAH: No?  
DOCTOR: No. Nor a palette knife for that matter. But I'd like to study under
one of the masters one day. Rembrandt, preferably.  
SARAH: Rembrandt?  
DOCTOR: Mmm hmm.  
SARAH: Can you, can you just go anywhere you like in that Tardis?  
DOCTOR: Yes, within reason.  
SARAH: Then why are you staying here? Why don't you go somewhere safer?  
DOCTOR: Because, my dear Sarah, I've got a job to do. One that involves the
whole future of your species. Here, hold this will you?  
(The Doctor hands Sarah a piece of rope, and he cuts it into shorter lengths.)  
SARAH: My species?  
DOCTOR: Mmm hmm.  
SARAH: You're talking as if you weren't human.  
DOCTOR: Yes, well, the definition of the word humanity was always a rather a
complex question, wasn't it?  
SARAH: You know perfectly well what I mean. Are you or aren't you?  
DOCTOR: If you mean am I a native of the planet Terra, the answer is no, I'm
not.  
SARAH: Well, what are you then?  
DOCTOR: Me? I'm a Time Lord.  
SARAH: A Time Lord?  
DOCTOR: Yes, that's right. And my people are very keen to stamp out unlicensed
time travel. You can look upon them as galactic ticket inspectors, if you
like.  
SARAH: Galactic ticket inspectors? Oh, I could murder a cup of tea. You're
serious, aren't you?  
DOCTOR: About what I do, yes. Not necessarily the way I do it. For example,
you know what this is?  
(The Doctor holds up one of the sacks, containing his yellow mixture.)  
SARAH: I've no idea.  
DOCTOR: This is my own special smoking mixture, consisting of saltpetre,
sulphur and fat. With a few little extras thrown in.  
(A trumpet sounds.)  
DOCTOR: Ah. That is Irongron. Battle is about to commence!

**[Forest]**

(Outside Sir Edward's castle, Irongron joins Linx surveying their target.
Faces wearing helmets can be seen in all the crenellations.)  
IRONGRON: We've been tricked, Bloodaxe. That dolt of a prisoner swore that
Edward had but a few old men to guard his castle!  
BLOODAXE: My Lord of Salisbury must have sent him help.  
IRONGRON: The messenger to Lord Salisbury died in our dungeons. These cannot
be Salisbury's men.  
LINX: Why do you wait? What will be your first method of attack?  
IRONGRON: We don't attack. We return to my castle.  
LINX: You fear to fight? The greater the odds, the greater the glory.  
IRONGRON: I fear nothing, toadface! But there is little profit in butchered
for naught.  
BLOODAXE: Sir Edward holds his walls with too strong a force.  
LINX: Then use your rifles. Shoot them from the walls.  
IRONGRON: Rifles?  
LINX: The weapons that I made for you. They have the range.  
IRONGRON: Ah. On my oath, Linx, when I am King, you shall be my champion!

**[Sir Edward's battlements]**

SARAH: That's made them stop and think, anyway.  
DOCTOR: I thought Linx would have to come along. Sontarans just can't resist
getting involved in war.  
SARAH: But this must be very minor league stuff to him, surely?  
DOCTOR: He's just like a little boy, stirring up the red ants and the black
ants. This is something to keep him amused, to stop him from getting bored.  
(Irongron fires a rifle, and hits the stonework.)  
SARAH: They've got guns!

**[Forest]**

BLOODAXE: No man has fallen, Captain.  
IRONGRON: Your weapons do not work, Linx!  
LINX: You do not shoot them straight. Watch.  
(Linx is handed a rifle. He shoots a dummy through the 'neck'.)  
LINX: Those figures are dummies.  
IRONGRON: Bah! Your weapons are useless!  
LINX: They do not move nor fall. They are not living men.  
IRONGRON: I smell that fox of a Doctor behind this. Bring up the scaling
ladders!

**[Sir Edward's battlements]**

SARAH: Here they come, Doctor!  
(The Doctor lights a short fuse on one of his little smoke bombs and tosses it
over the wall, where is pours out yellow smoke at the feet of their attackers.
More follow, and Sarah helps him throw them. Some go off bang, and Irongron
and his men retreat back to the tree line. Now Sir Edward's archers take over
the defence.)  
IRONGRON: Away! Away! Come on, move it.  
DOCTOR: Yes, well I think we'd better get back inside before that smoke rises.
It's liable to hang around for quite some time.  
SARAH: What was that stuff, Doctor? Some kind of gas?  
DOCTOR: Gas? Good heavens, what on Earth do you take me for? No, it was some
sort of superior stink bomb with a few bangs and flashes thrown in for good
measure. No, it's quite harmless, I assure you, but (sniff) phew.

**[Irongron's hall]**

(Irongron and his men are still trying to cough up the smell from their
lungs.)  
IRONGRON: Bring me wine! Wine, I say! To quench the dust from my throat and
the stench from my nostrils. More, wench! More! Am I a sparrow to quench my
thirst with a few scant drops? Oh, mice! A few loud noises, a few bad smells
and you scatter like sheep!  
BLOODAXE: It was sorcery, master. Black devil's work, you said so yourself.
Well, this wizard, the Doctor, he's gone and joined Sir Edward, and he threw
all the fires and the stenches of hell itself at us!  
IRONGRON: With poltroons like these, it were ill work to lay siege to a hen
coop!  
BLOODAXE: They do but need food and rest to recover their spirits, Captain.  
IRONGRON: We attack again tomorrow morning. I will take Sir Edward's castle or
I will see every man of you perish in the attempt! Chicken-hearted knaves!
Begone from my sight!  
(Linx enters carrying his helmet, as the men and Meg leave.)  
LINX: Did I not see you yourself leading their retreat, Captain?  
IRONGRON: Taunt me not, little toadface, or by the stars I'll see if the
colour of your blood is red like mortal man's.  
LINX: You Earth creatures give up too easily. I doubt if you have the
potential to make a truly military species.  
IRONGRON: And you, Linx, you claim to like war. I haven't seen you doing much
this day.  
LINX: I came only to observe. I should have known better than to look for
interest in a struggle of primitives. Threaten me once more and I will destroy
you.  
IRONGRON: Why, you  
(Irongron raises his arm and Linx slaps him down and across the table easily.)  
LINX: Primitives! Childish, squabbling primitives! It is well I do not need to
spend much more time among you.

**[Sir Edward's hall]**

(Hal, Sarah and the Doctor are dining with Sir Edward and Lady Eleanor. They
are laughing. Sir Edward throws a chicken bone over his shoulder, so the
Doctor copies him and gets a Look from Sarah.)  
EDWARD: More wine, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: No, thank you, no. Oh well, just perhaps just a little.  
EDWARD: Those knaves of Irongron, they ran like rabbits. Finest sight that
ever I saw, Doctor. And all thanks to you and your wizardry.  
DOCTOR: Well, we all played our part, Sir Edward.  
EDWARD: Now your magic works for us, our troubles are over.  
DOCTOR: Not quite, I'm afraid.  
SARAH: The Doctor thinks Irongron's bound to attack again.  
EDWARD: And you shall affright the knaves with more of your sorceries.  
DOCTOR: It won't work indefinitely, I fear. This time we had the element of
surprise. They won't be frightened off quite so easily again.  
EDWARD: Then we've gained a respite, no more.  
SARAH: Actually, the Doctor does have another idea.  
ELEANOR: Then let us hear your counsel, Doctor. So far you have served us
well.  
DOCTOR: Well, there's one sure way to prevent Irongron from capturing your
castle.  
EDWARD: And that is?  
DOCTOR: You must capture his.  
EDWARD: You advise the impossible, Doctor, when they outnumber us so greatly.  
DOCTOR: My Lady, are you familiar with these herbs and simples?  
ELEANOR: Ragwort, henbane, love-in-a-mist, fennel, sesame. Most we have dried
in the kitchens, the rest grow in the woods nearby.  
DOCTOR: Excellent. I want to brew up a little draught.  
ELEANOR: You mean to mix a magic potion to slay the dog?  
DOCTOR: No, no, not quite. Just something to calm him down a little.

**[Irongron's hall]**

(Irongron has got plenty of Dutch Courage inside him by now.)  
IRONGRON: Oh, I should have slain the filthy little toad there and then. I
should have carved him up into collops on the spot.  
BLOODAXE: Aye, master, it puzzles me as to why you did not  
IRONGRON: Aye, well, 'tis a matter of high policy, d'you see? Above your
understanding. As yet, we still need Linx's aid. Weapons he has promised me,
and by the stars, weapons I shall have. Wonderful, magical weapons, that will
crumble the castles of those that oppose me into dust. And then, and only
then, shall Linx die by my hand.  
BLOODAXE: Oh, 'tis a cunning plan, Captain.  
IRONGRON: Aye, 'tis as well for you dolts that you have me to guide you. Ah,
there's more to war than hard strokes, my good Bloodaxe.  
BLOODAXE: Aye, master, yours is indeed a towering intelligence.

**[Irongron's castle drawbridge]**

(Two monks approach the guards.)  
GUARD: Hold, friar. What business have you here?  
DOCTOR: (yokel) We come to beg alms of the good Captain Irongron. The fame of
his charity is spread far and wide.  
GUARD: You will find Captain Irongron in the great hall. He is indeed a kindly
and charitable man and his temper is most sweet and pleasant. Pass, friar.  
DOCTOR: Heaven will reward you, my son. Come, brother.  
(The Doctor and Sarah enter the castle.)  
GUARD: It is to be hoped the two friars are fleet of foot, or the church will
have two new martyrs ere long.

**[Irongron's castle corridor]**

(The Doctor and Sarah have taken off the habits. Sarah is dressed in the style
of the time. They hide as a door opens, and Linx walks past carrying a long
box on his shoulder.)  
DOCTOR: Right, let's take a look in Linx's workshop.

**[Linx's workshop]**

SARAH: What's that?  
DOCTOR: That's a Sontaran spaceship, to be precise, and tremendously powerful
for its size, just like its owner. Here, give me your habit.  
(The scientist in the striped pajamas walks past.)  
SARAH: What's wrong with him?  
DOCTOR: Deep hypnosis.  
RUBEISH: Ah, there you are, Doctor. Back again, eh?  
SARAH: Professor Rubeish!  
RUBEISH: What? Oh, it's you. Doctor, I knew this girl was involved. We should
have reported her as I wanted.  
DOCTOR: Yes, well, I'm very glad we didn't. In a few hours that ship's going
to be ready for takeoff.  
RUBEISH: Yes, he's been working these people at a killing pace. Come over
here.  
(A man is lying on the floor.)  
RUBEISH: Look. No sleep. Practically no food. They're starting to collapse
like flies.  
DOCTOR: I'm not surprised, he's suffering from near starvation.  
SARAH: Oh, we'll have to get them some food, Doctor, or at least a drink.  
DOCTOR: There's no time for that.  
SARAH: They'll die if we don't.  
DOCTOR: Sarah, listen to me. Linx's spaceship is just about ready for take
off. And if that happens, there's going to be the most tremendous explosion.
Everybody in this castle will die.

**[Irongron's hall]**

(Linx drops the box on the table.)  
LINX: These are the weapons I have promised you. Also a good supply of the
projectiles that they use.  
IRONGRON: Oh, my thanks, good toadface. Er, good Linx. More weapons from the
stars.  
LINX: I shall complete the repairs of the improved fighting robot, if I have
time before I leave.  
IRONGRON: If you wish to leave, then you would do well to obey me.  
LINX: Do you threaten me? I leave when I am ready and that will be soon.  
IRONGRON: And will you carry your starship on your back, good toad? You needed
my knaves to bring it here. You will need them to take it hence.  
LINX: Evidently you have no understanding of the forces involved in
interstellar travel. I shall leave when I am ready. It would be foolish of you
to attempt to stop me.

**[Linx's workshop]**

(The Doctor is flashing a small torch into a scientist's eyes.)  
RUBEISH: Doctor, what are you doing?  
DOCTOR: Trying to break this hypnosis.  
RUBEISH: It's very deep. Narcoleptic condition, eh?  
DOCTOR: The brain can still receive signals, Professor. It might work.  
RUBEISH: Even if it does, can't see what you intend.  
DOCTOR: Don't you want to get back to the twentieth century?  
RUBEISH: Steak and mushrooms, lobster, chocolate truffles. Oh dear me, yes.  
DOCTOR: If I can get these people to respond, I can send them back to their
own time with Linx's osmic projector.  
RUBEISH: Osmic projector?  
DOCTOR: Yes, it's over there on the table. Take a look.  
SARAH: Why can't you just send them as they are?  
DOCTOR: It's too risky with their minds in this state. The transition might
damage them permanently.  
SARAH: I've never heard so much gobbledegook in my life, but I expect you know
what you're talking about.  
DOCTOR: Polka time!  
SARAH + RUBEISH: What?  
RUBEISH: It's the beat. Look, he's beginning to respond.  
(Linx enters.)  
DOCTOR: Hide.  
(Linx takes of his helmet and goes over to one of the men on the floor.)  
LINX: Up! Get back to work!  
(Linx uses his ray gun. The one that the Doctor had been working on tries to
stand then falls over again.)  
LINX: Work. What's wrong with you? Get up or I will kill you!  
DOCTOR: Leave him, Linx!  
LINX: Ah. How fortunate that you have returned, Doctor. My failure to destroy
you was the one thing that marred the pleasure of my approaching departure
from this miserable planet.  
DOCTOR: Well, don't you want to know why I returned?  
LINX: It is of no interest to me.  
DOCTOR: I came here to offer you my help.  
LINX: We're sworn enemies, Doctor. Why should you help me?  
DOCTOR: Because I want something from you. If you will let me de-hypnotise
people and send them home, and help me capture Irongron and his men, then I
will assist you in the repairs to your spaceship. Now, the weapons that you've
made for Irongron you can leave here in the castle, and when it's empty, you
can take off, destroying castle and weapons at the same time. All right,
Commander Linx, what do you say?  
LINX: You wish for my answer, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: I do.  
LINX: Then here it is.  
(Linx fires his ray gun at the Doctor.)

__**Part Four**__

**[Linx's workshop]**

(Sarah comes out of hiding and pushes Linx's arm up.)  
SARAH: No!  
(The Doctor collapses and Linx pushes her away.)  
LINX: The female, too. It seems I am doubly fortunate.  
(Mister striped pajamas collapses.)  
LINX: Get up! Get back to work!  
DOCTOR: Linx, can't you see that your prisoners are physically exhausted?
They've had no sleep and nothing to eat for days.  
LINX: They can still work.  
DOCTOR: Not for much longer.  
LINX: I owe these primitives nothing.  
(Rubeish sneaks around the back and goes to get a piece of wood.)  
LINX: My only concern is to rejoin our glorious struggle for freedom.  
DOCTOR: That's such an old tune. Don't you know there's no such thing as the
super race?  
LINX: Your Time Lord philosophy is egalitarian twaddle. It is a weakness.  
DOCTOR: Every species has its own weakness, Linx. For instance, you can only
be stunned by a blow on the probic vent, that small hole at the back of your
neck.  
LINX: In our case, Doctor, it is a strength, because it means we must always
face our enemies.  
(Rubeish uses his monocle to spy out the tube at the back of Linx's collar.)  
LINX: Now, to return to the question of your demise. I think it would be
better if you witnessed first the destruction of your female companion.  
(Linx turns to Sarah and Rubeish swings. Linx falls with a gurgle.)  
DOCTOR: Well done, Rubeish.  
SARAH: Doctor, are you all right?  
DOCTOR: Yes. Yes. The blast was too brief. But I wouldn't have been in a few
moments. Thank you very much, Sarah.  
SARAH: Oh, pleasure.  
(Sarah helps the Doctor stand up.)  
SARAH: Hadn't I better be getting on with the rest of your plan?  
DOCTOR: Yes, all right, but be careful.  
SARAH: You too, Doctor.  
(Sarah leaves.)  
DOCTOR: Right, well, if we can secure our friend here, we can get on with the
job of restoring his wretched victims.  
RUBEISH: Will this help?  
(A handful of plastic covered wire.)  
DOCTOR: Rubeish, you're invaluable, my dear chap.

**[Irongron's hall]**

(Irongron has opened the box of new rifles.)  
IRONGRON: Bloodaxe.  
BLOODAXE: Captain.  
IRONGRON: Fetch me Linx. Fetch me that scabby faced stoat from his burrow.  
BLOODAXE: At once, Captain.

**[Linx's workshop]**

(The Doctor has trussed up Linx hand and foot.)  
DOCTOR: Well, that should hold him for a while, even on this planet.  
RUBEISH: Why this planet?  
DOCTOR: Well, in his own environment he weighs several tons. Fortunately his
muscles have been designed for load bearing rather than leverage.  
RUBEISH: Fascinating. I'd always assumed that creatures from a high density
planet would have developed a pressure balanced physiology. For example, if
you take certain types of seaweed  
BLOODAXE [OC]: Linx! Linx!  
(The Doctor puts on Linx's helmet. Bloodaxe peers round the door cautiously.)  
BLOODAXE: Linx?  
DOCTOR: Who speaks?  
BLOODAXE: Captain Irongron commands your presence.  
DOCTOR: Tell him I'm busy.  
BLOODAXE: Well, come soon or we come and fetch you.  
(Bloodaxe closes the door quickly. The Doctor takes off the helmet.)  
RUBEISH: Who is Irongron? Is he a nice chap?  
DOCTOR: Well, I wouldn't recommend him for the Royal Society. All right,
Rubeish old chap, now you know how to bring these people round?  
RUBEISH: Yes. A simple repetitive optical  
DOCTOR: Yes, quite so. I'll leave you to get on with it.  
RUBEISH: Well, what do you propose to do?  
DOCTOR: I was going to preset this osmic projector and send these people back
to their own time, but now I have to find a way of stalling Irongron.  
(The Doctor spots the robot knight hanging on a pillar.)  
DOCTOR: The robot! Yes, of course. That ought to give him something to think
about.

**[Irongron's kitchen]**

(Sarah sneaks in and starts putting food from the table into a small sack.)  
MEG: Thief!  
SARAH: You common scullion, stand aside. How dare you obstruct me? I shall
have you flogged.  
MEG: Oh, so, a lady, are you? A lady dressed as a serving wench?  
SARAH: I'm hungry. Please let me go. I've tasted neither bread nor meat for
nearly a month.  
(Meg holds Sarah's wrist and looks at her palm.)  
MEG: No, nor done no work for longer by the look of you. All right, my girl,
I'll give you bread and cheese, but you'll have to earn it.

**[Irongron's hall]**

(The robot enters, sword swinging up and down.)  
IRONGRON: Who are you?  
DOCTOR: (inside the suit) I am a gift to Captain Irongron from the one who
made me, my master, Commander Linx.  
IRONGRON: It is indeed the robot, Bloodaxe, though somewhat different in
shape. And I remember, Linx promised to make me a second iron man, one that
would obey my voice. But why has Linx sent you? Why has he not he himself
obeyed my summons?  
DOCTOR: My master toils in his workshop to make you more fighting robots. He
sent me as proof of his goodwill.  
IRONGRON: What?  
DOCTOR: Now I must return.  
IRONGRON: Hold. I would see something of the mettle of this gift. Can you
fight, iron man?  
DOCTOR: That is my purpose.  
IRONGRON: Then fight me.  
DOCTOR: I was programmed to fight for you, not against you.  
IRONGRON: Cease thy gabble and fight.  
DOCTOR: You will damage my circuits.  
IRONGRON: Fight, iron man, or you'll return to Linx in as many pieces as did
your brother.  
(Irongron swings his sword and the Doctor ducks under it. They trade a few
blows and Irongron pushes him back onto the table. The Doctor rolls away from
the blow and continues a defensive fight until Irongron falls over a chair and
the Doctor can just put his sword to his neck.)  
IRONGRON: Hold.  
BLOODAXE: It's truly a marvel, Captain. Never have I seen a finer swordsman.  
IRONGRON: Ah, tis great sport this, Bloodaxe. Draw your sword and join me.
We'll try this creature's strength to the upmost.

**[Irongron's kitchen]**

(Meg admonishes a wench. The swordfight can be heard here.)  
MEG: Get on!  
SARAH: What's that?  
MEG: Oh, fighting again in the great hall, I'll warrant. Men were ever like
children, fond of noise and brawling. Get about your work, girl.

**[Irongron's hall]**

IRONGRON: Hold. Hold, I say! We must slow this iron man's speed a little.
Stick me some crossbow bolts in the creature. We'll see if it fights as well
with a crossbow bolt or two in its gizzard. And if that fails, we'll lop off
its head and try again then.  
DOCTOR: Isn't that a bit unsporting, old man? I mean, sitting ducks and all
that.  
IRONGRON: This iron man talks like some Norman ninny. Lift up your visor.  
DOCTOR: I cannot reveal my face, Irongron.  
IRONGRON: Why?  
DOCTOR: Because if I did, it might give you a seizure.  
(So Irongron does it for him.)  
IRONGRON: The wizard!  
DOCTOR: Well, I did warn you, didn't I?  
(The Doctor makes a dash for the door.)  
IRONGRON: Seize him!  
(The Doctor is dragged back in and forced to his knees. Irongron removes the
helm and lifts his sword to strike, then pauses.)  
IRONGRON: No. The sword is too quick and clean a death for you. Well, since
you are a wizard, then by wizardry shall you die.

**[Irongron's kitchen]**

MEG: Not so much of that oatmeal, girl. It's only pikemen we're feeding, not
horses. Hey, watch that pot.  
(Meg goes over to Sarah at the fireplace.)  
MEG: If you burn Irongron's stew, he'll have your liver cut out.  
SARAH: Is all this for Irongron?  
MEG: Him and his chamber guard.  
SARAH: How many's that?  
MEG: Half a dozen. You're full of questions, girl.  
SARAH: Don't the guards on the gate get stew?  
MEG: What, meat for those common creatures? I should say not. They'll have
oatmeal the same as the rest of us, and lusty enough they are on that. So you
watch yourself if ever you take out that skillet.  
SARAH: I'm not afraid of men. They don't own the world. Why should women
always have to cook and carry for them?  
MEG: What else should we do?  
SARAH: Stand up for ourselves. Tell the men you're tired of working for them
like slaves.  
MEG: We are slaves.  
SARAH: Then you should set yourselves free.  
MEG: Oh? And how should we do that?  
SARAH: Don't you want to be free?  
MEG: Women will never be free while there are men in the world, girl. We have
our place.  
SARAH: What subservient poppycock. You're still living in the Middle Ages.  
MEG: Eh?  
SARAH: Nothing.  
MEG: You're young and foolish, girl. And I warn you, keep those thoughts to
yourself or you'll not live long enough to grow wiser. I must tell them their
food will soon be ready.  
(Meg leaves. Sarah pours some of the Doctor's sleeping potion into the stewpot
then goes over to the girl preparing the oatmeal.)  
SARAH: Look at that great spider!  
(The girl looks up and screams, and Sarah tips the rest of the potion into the
pot.)

**[Linx's workshop]**

(Rubeish is deprogramming the scientists, singing to keep the rhythm needed.)  
RUBEISH: Oh see me dance the polka, oh see me dah dah dee. (hums the rest.)  
(The man's eyelids flicker.)  
RUBEISH: Ah, that's it. Come on, stand up, my dear chap. Come on. Come on.
That's it.  
(There are now five alert scientists, plus Rubeish.)  
RUBEISH: Now listen, all of you. You've been kidnapped, but you're about to be
rescued. I hope. There's a machine here that'll send you home again.
Unfortunately, I don't know how to work it, and the chap who does has
vanished. But I expect he'll pop up again. He usually does. But the important
thing is, until then, you must carry on working as if you were still
hypnotised.  
MORRISON: Can I ask  
RUBEISH: Oh, Morrison, don't start asking a lot of awkward questions. I assure
you I don't know the answers any more than you do.  
IRONGRON [OC]: Linx!  
RUBEISH: Back to work, everyone. Someone's coming.  
(Rubeish hides and Irongron enters.)  
IRONGRON: Linx, you dog! Where are you hiding?  
(Irongron finds the Doctor's jacket and gives it a shake, growling. Then he
spots the trussed up Sontaran on the floor.)  
IRONGRON: Oh, there you are, you dragon eyed toad. Who puts these bonds on
you?  
(Irongron cuts Linx free.)  
LINX: The Doctor. I was struck from behind. Where is he?  
IRONGRON: The Doctor is dying.  
LINX: What method have you chosen to destroy him?

**[Irongron's hall]**

(Irongron throws the Doctor's jacket at him.)  
DOCTOR: Thank you, sir, for your charm and old world courtesy. May I ask the
purpose of this tomfoolery? If you're going to have me shot, why don't you get
on with it?  
IRONGRON: I would not have your death be in vain, good sorcerer. I intend that
it shall be of some use to me.  
DOCTOR: Nothing that I do will be of use to you, Irongron.  
IRONGRON: Oh, nay, Doctor, but you're wrong. These knaves of mine lack
practice with their star weapons. A living target will give them a chance to
better their aim before tomorrow's battle. You, shoot!  
(One of the men struggles to pull back the firing pin, then aims and fires.
Although the Doctor moves, he only just misses.)  
IRONGRON: These knaves of mine aim so ill, Doctor, that you are mayhap safer
to stand still. You, shoot.  
(The Doctor ducks behind Irongron's 'throne' to avoid this shot.)  
IRONGRON: The aim improves, Doctor. Be patient. We shall hit the target all in
good time.  
DOCTOR: I'm in no great hurry, I assure you.  
IRONGRON: Oh, beshrew me, but I grow fond of this fellow. Shoot when you
please, lads, and a bag of gold to the one that brings him down.

**[Irongron's kitchen]**

SARAH: That noise! I can hear shooting.  
MEG: More tomfoolery.  
SARAH: What is it? What's happening?  
MEG: They've captured Sir Edward's sorcerer, this fellow the Doctor, and now
they're slaying him in the great hall with these devil's weapons of theirs.  
(Sarah runs up the stairs.)  
MEG: For the life of me I can't see what's wrong with a good old-fashioned
broad sword.

**[Irongron's hall]**

(The Doctor is still unscathed, and ducking and weaving. Some men have their
backs turned to reload the rifles.)  
IRONGRON: By the stars, this fellow hops around like a flea on a griddle.  
LINX: Give me a weapon. I will destroy him.  
IRONGRON: What? Would you spoil good sport, old toad?  
(Out in the passageway, Sarah takes off her dress to reveal the lincoln green
tunic and tights underneath. She runs up to the minstrel's gallery above the
main door, where the big iron candelabra is tied to the railing. The Doctor
runs up some steps to a doorway, but it is locked. Sarah lets the candelabra
swing free.)  
SARAH: Doctor!  
(The Doctor grabs the big iron ring as it crosses the hall and swings back
past the row of astonished riflemen and runs out.)

**[Outside the hall]**

(The Doctor bars the doors from the outside and Sarah comes down the stairs.)  
DOCTOR: Well done, Sarah. Just like a daring young man on the flying trapeze.
Come on.  
IRONGRON [OC]: Get them!

**[Irongron's castle courtyard]**

DOCTOR: Sarah, wait. Come on.  
(They run across to the main entrance and stroll nonchalantly out towards the
two guards. The Doctor stands between them, and beckons the men to come
closer. They do, and he shows them his hands, palm up then palm down, then a
fist, then a punch in the throat for both.)  
DOCTOR: Hai!

**[Sir Edward's hall]**

(At table.)  
DOCTOR: Do you know, I think that was one of the most active days I've had in
years. Well, it's not as if I was a lad anymore, once you're over two hundred.  
EDWARD: So then, Doctor, your plans have miscarried, I fear. What will you do
now?  
DOCTOR: Oh, wait a bit. Give the potion time to work and then go back.  
SARAH: But Doctor, you can't!  
DOCTOR: Sarah, I must. Rubeish and all those scientists are there. Now, Linx's
spaceship is just about ready for takeoff, and when that happens, there'll be
a tremendous explosion and all that will be left of that castle will be a pile
of stones.  
EDWARD: But Doctor, how can the castle go?  
DOCTOR: Just believe me, sir. When Linx goes, it goes.  
ELEANOR: Irongron's castle is to be destroyed by sorcery? Then all is well.  
DOCTOR: There are innocent people in that castle, my lady, and I don't like
the idea of anybody going up in smoke. Not even Irongron.  
SARAH: If you're going back, then I'm coming with you.  
HAL: I too will come with you, if my master permits.  
DOCTOR: Well, thank you. Thank you both. I can do with all the help I can get.

**[Linx's workshop]**

(Linx snatches a component from a scientist and goes into his spaceship. The
men gather to watch as the inside lights up. Linx comes out again.)  
LINX: Thank you, my friends. Your work is finished. You may rest now for a
time until the power build up is complete.  
(Linx leaves.)  
RUBEISH: Doctor, I think you'd better get a move on. I've a feeling time's
beginning to run out.

**[Forest]**

(The Doctor comes out of the Tardis with a set of metal strips that form a
circular fan. The guards at Irongron's castle begin to fall asleep at their
posts as he joins Hal and Sarah, who is now back in her dark suit.)  
DOCTOR: Good evening.  
SARAH: It's working, Doctor. Look.  
HAL: Aye, the villains sleep like innocent babes.  
DOCTOR: Good. Well, we'll wait a bit to be on the safe side, and then we'll go
in.

**[Linx's workshop]**

RUBEISH: At last, Doctor, there you are. Something most interesting happening
here.  
DOCTOR: Yes, so I see. Where's Linx?  
RUBEISH: I don't know. He started his spaceship going then cleared off.  
DOCTOR: Where's the osmic projector? It was over there on the table.  
RUBEISH: He put everything back inside the ship.  
DOCTOR: Well, I'll just have to take it out again, won't I. Hal, scout around
the castle. See if Irongron and his men are sleeping. If they are, disarm them
and come back here.  
(Hal leaves.)  
SARAH: What are you going to do, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Get the osmic projector. Fortunately it's an independent unit.  
SARAH: Well, can't you switch this thing off?  
DOCTOR: Well, I can try.  
SARAH: Suppose you don't succeed?  
DOCTOR: Then we've got between five and ten minutes to get out of here before
we're all blown to kingdom come.  
(As the Doctor rummages around in Linx's spaceship, Hal steps carefully over a
sleeping guard and takes his sword from him.)  
SARAH: Couldn't you shut it down?  
DOCTOR: No, the drive system is sealed. Linx must have taken the activator
key. I managed to get a hold of this, though. I was lucky to get it out with
the drive running. I think that should do it.  
(The Doctor adjusts the osmic projector.)  
DOCTOR: I've got to send them back one at a time. Get the first one to stand
over there, will you, Rubeish?  
RUBEISH: Come on, Morrison.  
DOCTOR: All right, Rubeish, come over here. I may want you to take over. Now
then, all you have to do is this, this and this. Get it.  
RUBEISH: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Right, here goes.  
(Striped pajamas disappears.)  
DOCTOR: Right, that ought to surprise them back at the Research Centre. Next
gentleman, please.  
RUBEISH: Come on.

**[Irongron's hall]**

(The men are still eating.)  
IRONGRON: For the last time, Linx, let there be no more talk of leaving.  
LINX: And I tell you for the last time, I am leaving now. Our alliance is at
an end.  
IRONGRON: It ends when I say it ends and not before.  
LINX: You would be well advised to march from this castle now and capture
another. Soon you will have need of it.  
BLOODAXE: He threatens us, Captain.  
IRONGRON: He does not understand our ways. Tomorrow, Linx, we smite the enemy,
hip and thigh. But tonight, we feast.  
LINX: By your dawn I shall be seven hundred million miles from here. Can I be
concerned with the fate of primitives?  
(Linx leaves to laughter.)  
BLOODAXE: What did he mean, Captain?  
IRONGRON: He is a toad. Who know what a toad thinks?  
BLOODAXE: Aye, Captain, 'tis truly said.  
(Bloodaxe falls asleep in his plate.)  
IRONGRON: This stew has made me heavy.  
(Another man falls asleep where he sits.)  
IRONGRON: Hey.  
(More start snoring, and Irongron also rests his head.)

**[Linx's workshop]**

(Another scientist is sent home, then the door opens.)  
DOCTOR: That's Linx. Send the rest of them back. I'll try and keep him busy.  
(The Doctor hands the osmic projector to Rubeish, picks up his reflector and
opens it. Linx uses his ray gun and the Doctor shields himself. And again, so
Linx resorts to brute force and smashes it out of the Doctor's hands. The
Doctor uses a few Venusian aikido moves while Rubeish sets the projector
again.)

**[Irongron's hall]**

(Hal is disarming the men when Irongron wakes and grabs him.)  
IRONGRON: Trickery! Sorcery!  
(Irongron throws Hal to the floor, knocking him out.)  
IRONGRON: What sorcery! Treachery! That toad Linx bewitched us all!  
(Irongron draws his sword and storms out.)

**[Linx's workshop]**

SARAH: Now you, professor.  
RUBEISH: I really don't think I ought to go and leave you.  
SARAH: Off you go now. Now then. This, this and this.  
RUBEISH: Well, goodbye and good luck. It really has been a most fascinating
experience. I hope you and the Doctor will be all right. See you back at the
Research Centre.  
(Rubeish disappears. Linx throws the Doctor across the room.)  
SARAH: Doctor!  
(Linx picks up his ray gun as Irongron enters.)  
IRONGRON: So, destroy my castle by sorcery, would you, toad face? Well,
Irongron's magic is too strong for you!  
(Irongron raises his sword and Linx kills him. Then Linx goes into his
spaceship and adjusts some controls.)

**[Irongron's hall]**

(Hal wakes, goes to Bloodaxe and shakes him.)  
HAL: Now listen, dog. In minutes now this castle will be destroyed by the
sorcery. If you'd save your miserable skins, then get you gone!  
(Hal runs out, and his words finally make it through to Bloodaxe's brain.)  
BLOODAXE: Flee, dogs! Flee for your life! Come on, waken, you dogs! And flee,
flee for your lives, you dogs! Waken! Waken up! Now flee!

**[Linx's workshop]**

SARAH: Doctor, do get up. We've got to get you out!  
(Hal runs in. The spaceship door is closing, but the archer still manages to
loose an arrow straight into Linx's probic vent. As he dies, Linx hits a large
switch.)  
DOCTOR: Something's gone wrong. He must have hit the take off button too soon.
Come on, we've got about a minute to get out of here. Quick, run!  
(Computer equipment starts to explode and the spaceship glows red.)

**[Forest]**

(The explosion knocks the Doctor, Sarah and Hal to the ground. They get up,
dust the leaf litter off and walk over to the Tardis.)  
DOCTOR: Well, you can tell Sir Edward that his problems are over, Hal.
Irongron, his castle, his magic weapons and his sorcerer, they're all
destroyed.  
HAL: Will you not tell him yourself, Doctor? He will reward you well. We owe
you much.  
DOCTOR: I'm sorry. I'm afraid we must be off. Goodbye, Hal.  
HAL: Goodbye, Doctor.  
SARAH: Goodbye.  
HAL: Goodbye. You are truly a great magician, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: To tell you the truth, Hal, I'm not a magician at all.  
SARAH: I'm not so sure about that.  
(The Doctor and Sarah go into the Tardis, and it dematerialises.)  
  
---  
  
<Back to the Episode listing

Doctor Who and related marks are trademarks of BBC . Copyright  1963,
Present. The web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment
purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

