

**Invasion of the Dinosaurs**  
  
Original Airdate: 12 Jan, 1974  

__**Part One**__

**[A London park]**

(Welcome to an eerily quiet London. The Albert Embankment, the Cenotaph,
Trafalgar Square, the West End, Old Billingsgate, Smithfield, everywhere that
there is usually humanity moving all hours of the day or night are empty. A
dog sniffs around a car where the driver's door has been left open. A milk
float is abandoned, with a smashed milk bottle and the money bag lying on the
pavement. Children's toys are left alone in the grass. The quiet is shattered
by the Tardis materialising.)  
SARAH: It seems to be all right.  
DOCTOR: Well, I told you I'd get you back home safely, didn't I?  
SARAH: We set off from the Research Centre.  
DOCTOR: Well, there's no point in going back there. No, I set course for UNIT
HQ.  
SARAH: Well, this isn't UNIT HQ.  
DOCTOR: The space time coordinates were a bit out, that's all. We can't be far
away.  
SARAH: So where are we?  
DOCTOR: Somewhere in London.  
SARAH: And when?  
DOCTOR: Well, when we left. Give or take a few weeks.  
SARAH: It's not the nineteenth century or the twenty first?  
DOCTOR: My dear Sarah, you are perfectly safe. Now all we've got to do now is
go and find a telephone and ring the Brigadier.  
(The sound of a tree crashing to the ground.)  
SARAH: What was that?  
DOCTOR: Well, the parks department's cutting down some trees. Come on.  
(Behind the Tardis are two deckchairs, one knocked over.)

**[A London road]**

(The Doctor finds a public telephone box but can't get a dialing tone.)  
DOCTOR: No, it doesn't work.  
SARAH: It's probably been vandalised.  
DOCTOR: That's a very unfair word, you know, because actually the Vandals were
quite decent chaps. Come on, let's see if we can go and find a taxi.  
SARAH: Some hopes. Well, there's a bus stop.  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
(There is life somewhere. A man comes down the fire escape of a large
building, but ducks out of sight when a Land Rover comes round the corner with
armed troops in it. Once it has gone past, the man hurries down to his own
car, throws a bag onto the passenger seat and drives off.)  
SARAH: There's no bus.  
DOCTOR: There's no anything. No, nothing's moving. No bicycles, no
pedestrians, no cars, nothing.  
SARAH: Why?  
DOCTOR: Well, perhaps it's Sunday. Great Britain always closes on Sundays.
Come on, I think we'd better walk.  
(The man in the car appears, but doesn't slow down when they gesture for a
lift. In fact, he nearly hits them.)  
SARAH: Charming!  
DOCTOR: Well, perhaps he doesn't like hitch-hikers.

**[Jeweller's shop]**

(The car pulls up outside a parade of shops in Moorfields and the driver gets
out, taking his bag with him. The Doctor and Sarah arrive, and see the car
with its passenger door left open. They investigate. The man is inside looking
over some chains and other jewellery when he looks up and hides. The Doctor
and Sarah enter.)  
DOCTOR: Anybody here?  
SARAH: Look.  
(Sarah has spotted the bag on the counter. The man appears holding a sawn off
shotgun.)  
PHILLIPS: I got here first. Turn round. Hands against that wall.  
DOCTOR: Do as he says, Sarah. Sarah, do as he says! Look, I realise that
you're very busy, but would you mind telling me what's going on around here?  
PHILLIPS: You find your own places. There's plenty to choose from. I got here
first.  
(Phillips runs out.)  
DOCTOR: Sarah, no! He's liable to shoot you out of pure terror.  
SARAH: I'll call the police.  
(Phillips drives away. Sarah dials 999.)  
SARAH: They're not answering.  
(Outside is a screech of tyres and a deep roar. The Doctor and Sarah run out
to see the car looking as if it had wrapped itself around a concrete pillar,
but there is nothing in sight that it could have hit. Phillips lies dead on
the pavement.)

**[UNIT HQ - temporary]**

(A radio operator writes down a message.)  
OGDEN: Right, okay, got it. Sarge? Another sighting.  
BENTON: Thank you, Ogden.  
(Benton marks it on a map while the Brigadier talks on a telephone.)  
BRIGADIER: Yes, that's right. Frequency of sightings about the same. There's
not much we can do, sir, except plot them. No, sir, the Doctor isn't back yet.
I'm hoping he'll return very soon. Yes, all right. Yes, all right, sir, I'll
keep you informed. Goodbye.  
YATES: Yes, got that. Thank you. Sir? Five more looters have been picked up in
Hyde Park.  
BRIGADIER: Ogden. Get this off to General Finch, will you?  
OGDEN: Sir.  
BRIGADIER: I've asked the regulars for more men. We've got to get more patrols
out.  
YATES: It's organised gangs now, sir.  
BRIGADIER: What?  
YATES: The looters.  
BRIGADIER: Well, it's only to be expected.  
YATES: We're going to need more detention centres.  
BRIGADIER: Yes, all right, Yates. Get them set up! The looters are a detail.
It's these we've got to worry about.

**[London]**

(A police station is locked up. The Doctor is carrying Phillips' bag of loot.)  
SARAH: There must be somebody somewhere.  
DOCTOR: Listen.  
SARAH: Over there.  
(A Land Rover drives past the end of the road.)  
DOCTOR: It's stopping. Come on.  
(The Land Rover reverses into a mews garage, and the doors shut before the
Doctor and Sarah arrive.)

**[Garage]**

(The Doctor and Sarah enter.)  
DOCTOR: Hello? Hello?  
(Two men drop something and hide, then one reappears holding an iron bar. The
Doctor easily deals with him, but the second man hits him over the head then
throws off Sarah. Outside there is automatic weapon fire. The two men get up
and run out. Sarah goes to help the Doctor.)  
SARAH: Are you all right?  
DOCTOR: Not really, no. Help me up, will you?  
(Vehicles drive past outside.)  
DOCTOR: Oh, it's an ill wind. At least we've got some transport. Open that
door, Sarah, will you?  
(The Doctor puts Phillips' bag into the Land Rover as Sarah tries the garage
doors.)  
SARAH: They're jammed.  
(Something screeches nearby and what looks like a small pterodactyl glides
down the stairs and buzzes Sarah and the Doctor.)  
DOCTOR: Get out! Come on, in the back!  
(The Doctor throws a sack at the flying lizard, which gets caught it its
claws. They get into the Land Rover and it smashes the drivers window with its
long toothed beak. The Doctor fights it off, gets the Land Rover started and
smashes through the doors. Registration 20DM58 - must be military.)

**[UNIT HQ - temporary]**

BRIGADIER: I'm sorry, sir, I can't agree to that.  
FINCH: I'm giving you a direct order, Brigadier.  
BRIGADIER: With respect, sir, I cannot and will not allow troops under my
command to open fire upon civilians.  
FINCH: These civilians are looters, and central London is under martial law.  
BRIGADIER: What's happening is deplorable, sir, but may I remind you that
looters are not our main problem? Shortage of observation patrols is.  
FINCH: The army has been stretched to its limits with the evacuation of eight
million people.  
BRIGADIER: The evacuation is now complete, sir.  
FINCH: For you, perhaps, but not for us. All these wretched people have to be
fed, sheltered, cared for.  
BRIGADIER: But the front line's here, sir, in central London. It's more
important to find the cause of this crisis than to deal with its effects.  
FINCH: All right, but what are you doing about it?  
BRIGADIER: Plotting the incidents as they occur and searching London to find
their cause.  
FINCH: And waiting for this mysterious scientific advisor of yours to turn up?  
BRIGADIER: That's right, sir.  
FINCH: Hmm. I suppose he'll just materialise out of thin air.  
BRIGADIER: Very probably.  
FINCH: Very well. But while we're waiting for this Doctor of yours, you will
obey my orders. You can have your extra patrols, Brigadier, but my
instructions to them are that any looter who does not surrender immediately
will be shot.

**[Warehouse]**

(A group of armed soldiers are waiting as the Doctor and Sarah drive in and
get out of the Land Rover.)  
NORTON: Halt! Place your hands above your head!  
(The Corporal in charge fires into the air.)  
NORTON: That will be your only warning. Raise your hands!  
(The Doctor and Sarah obey.)  
DOCTOR: Will you please tell me what's happening?  
NORTON: Over there by the Land Rover. Turn round, lean forward, hands against
the side.  
DOCTOR: Look, will you please tell me what's going on here?  
NORTON: Turn round! Search their vehicle.  
(Norton frisks the Doctor and Sarah while his patrol find the holdall and a
pile of fur coats in the Land Rover.)  
NORTON: You have had a busy day, haven't you?

**[Detention centre]**

(A Sergeant reads out the charges to a man in a denim jacket.)  
DUFFY: Right. You were arrested today, found looting in possession of two tape
recorders, one radio and a colour television set. You will be held for
military trial. Photographs.  
(A soldier takes the man away.)  
DUFFY: Next. Names?  
DOCTOR: Now, if I can have a word with someone in authority.  
DUFFY: Names.  
SARAH: Sarah Jane Smith.  
DUFFY: Name?  
DOCTOR: Doctor John Smith. No relation.  
DUFFY: Age?  
SARAH: Twenty three.  
DUFFY: Age?  
DOCTOR: You'd never believe me.  
DUFFY: Offence?  
NORTON: Looting furs, jewels and money.  
DUFFY: Right. You'll be held for military trial. Over there for photographs.  
SARAH: But why are the military running everything?  
DOCTOR: Come on, Sarah. Let's go and have our photos taken, shall we?  
(They cross the room.)  
DOCTOR: Oh, deary me, that's very antiquated equipment, isn't it? I'll think
you'll find that the right is my best side.  
NORTON: Shut up and hold that in front of you.  
DOCTOR: Oh, all right.  
(Prisoner 177781 smiles for his mug shots.)  
NORTON: Now you.  
SARAH: Thank you.  
( Prisoner 177782 also smiles for her pictures.)  
DOCTOR: Now, what about one of both of us? Come and join in.  
NORTON: Over there. Down there. On the floor.  
DOCTOR: No, we'd rather stand, if you don't mind.  
NORTON: Sit down!  
(Sarah nods towards something behind them.)  
DOCTOR: Oh! What a good idea. There we are.  
(The Doctor takes a couple of folding chairs from the pile.)  
DOCTOR: That's better.  
NORTON: Keep them quiet.  
PRIVATE: All right.  
SARAH: What do we do now?  
DOCTOR: Wait for the officer to turn up. Maybe we can get some sense out of
him.  
SARAH: What on Earth's going on? What's happening?  
DOCTOR: I've no idea. Maybe this gentleman here can enlighten us.  
(The man in the denim jacket is sitting on the floor.)  
DOCTOR: How do you do, sir? I'm the Doctor.  
LODGE: You've got nothing to be cheerful about. There's no judge and jury now,
mate. Military law.  
SARAH: But why?  
LODGE: Where you been? Because of the monsters!

**[Road]**

(A three story building explodes as something very large with equally big
teeth smashes through it. A soldier reports in on his R/T.)  
SOLDIER: It's coming straight for us, sir, and we're trapped. Same as usual.
The bullets won't do any good. We're going to try and turn it with the
grenades.  
(T Rex doesn't seem too happy with the big bang.)  
SOLDIER: It's working, sir. Seems to be moving off.

**[UNIT HQ - temporary]**

(Reception is terrible.)  
SOLDIER [OC]: It's running away now, sir. North north west in the direction of  
OGDEN: It's gone again. Happens every time, sir. Whenever we get a sight, the
R/T reception's diabolical.  
BRIGADIER: Yes, I'm well aware of that.  
BENTON: Yes, sir, but there must be some connection. Whatever's causing the
monsters is causing the interference.  
BRIGADIER: The thought had occurred to me, Benton, but since we don't know
what's causing either we're not really much the wiser.  
(A soldier puts a folder on a desk and the Brigadier picks it up.)  
BRIGADIER: Latest batch of looters. File them.  
BENTON: Right, sir.  
BRIGADIER: Huh. Another message from the government here telling us to make
sure that law and order's maintained in the evacuative zone. They seem to have
forgotten the main problem.  
BENTON: Yes, well, it's all right for them, stuck safe and sound up in
Harrogate. What a scruffy looking bunch we've got here.  
SOLDIER: You can say that again.  
BENTON: Hey, sir, look.  
BRIGADIER: What?  
(Benton hands over a mug shot.)  
BRIGADIER: Good grief. Looter charged with stolen furs, jewellery and money.  
BENTON: And there's one of that journalist girl, Sarah Jane Smith.  
BRIGADIER: They're being held at number five reception centre. Ogden, number
five reception. Get them on the R/T, will you?  
OGDEN: No good, sir.  
BRIGADIER: Oh, all right, I'll go there myself. Get my jeep, will you?  
BENTON: There's a planning conference for General Finch in ten minutes, sir.
Well, shall I go?  
BRIGADIER: No, you'd better stay here. Send a dispatch rider and get them
brought here as quickly as possible.  
BENTON: Right, sir.  
BRIGADIER: Typical. Absolutely typical. What is the man playing at?

**[Detention centre]**

(The Doctor appears to be asleep. Their guard is reading a magazine. Lodge
glances at him then Sarah.)  
LODGE: Psst.  
SARAH: Mmm?  
(She nudges the Doctor.)  
DOCTOR: Yes?  
LODGE: (sotto) There's only him. We could make a break for it.  
SARAH: (sotto) And get ourselves shot?  
LODGE: (sotto) You know what they'll do with us?  
DOCTOR: (sotto) No. Do you?  
LODGE: (sotto) Twenty years in some detention camp. Look, with a bit of luck
we could get out of here. What do you reckon?  
DOCTOR: (sotto) No, thank you very much.  
(The officer has arrived.)  
DUFFY: Right, on your feet! Prisoners, forward.  
DUFFY: Prisoners numbers one seven double seven eight oh, one seven double
seven eight one and one seven double seven eight two, sir.  
DOCTOR: We do have names, you know.  
SHEARS: Just these three, Sergeant?  
DUFFY: Yes, sir.  
SHEARS: All right, let's get on with it. I have to be back at HQ in ten
minutes time. Evidence?  
DUFFY: Seven eight oh, Lodge, sir. Caught in possession of two tape recorders,
one radio and a colour television set.  
SHEARS: Anything to say?  
LODGE: Well, yes. I, er, found the stuff, see. I was going to hand it in.  
SHEARS: You've been found guilty of looting. Under the authority vested in me
by the Emergency Powers Act, I'm issuing an order that you be held in a
military detention centre for the duration of the emergency. You'll be handed
over to the civil authorities for trial and sentence when time permits. Next!  
DUFFY: Seven eight one and seven eight two were caught together, sir, in
possession of furs, jewels and stolen money.  
SHEARS: Were they now?  
DUFFY: Yes, sir.  
SHEARS: Anything to say?  
SARAH: We found those things after someone else had stolen them.  
SHEARS: And you were going hand them in?  
SARAH: Yes.  
SHEARS: Very original. You've been found guilty of looting.  
DOCTOR: Now just one moment.  
DUFFY: Hey, keep quiet.  
SHEARS: Well, what is it?  
DOCTOR: Sir, I am the scientific advisor to UNIT, and I demand to be put in
immediate touch with Brigadier Lethbridge Stewart.  
SHEARS: I suppose he's an old friend of yours?  
DOCTOR: Yes, as a matter of fact he is.  
SHEARS: How very interesting. You've been found guilty of looting. Under the
authority vested in me by the Emergency Powers Act, I'm issuing an order that
you'll be held in a military detention centre for the duration of the
emergency. You will be handed over to the civil authorities for trial and
sentence when time permits. Put them on the next transport for detention
centre, will you?  
DUFFY: Sir.  
SHEARS: I must be off.  
DUFFY: Attention!  
SHEARS: Carry on, Sergeant.  
(Shears leaves.)  
DUFFY: Right, back over there.  
LODGE: See? I told you. Stuck in a detention camp for months. In prison.  
SARAH: What are we going to do, Doctor? Nobody will listen to us.  
DOCTOR: (sotto) Tell me, my friend. What was that idea that you had about
escaping?  
LODGE: (sotto) Well, there's three of us. We could jump him.  
DOCTOR: (sotto) Oh, I think we can be a bit more original than that, can't we?  
LODGE: (sotto) So what do we do, then?  
DOCTOR: (sotto) We have a fight.  
LODGE: Eh?  
DOCTOR: You're the nark, aren't ya? It was you wot grassed on us!  
LODGE: I never grassed in my life!  
DOCTOR: Yes, you did. Come on! On your feet! Come on, up!  
LODGE: All right then, you great dressed up twit, you asked for it!  
(The Doctor blocks the punch.)  
DOCTOR: (sotto) Steady.  
(They exchange blows then Lodge starts to throttle the Doctor.)  
SARAH: Guard, stop them! You have to stop them!  
SOLDIER: Break it up! Break it up!  
(The Doctor grabs the soldier with a nerve pinch to the back of the neck, and
he collapses. Lodge takes his weapon.)  
LODGE: What did you do?  
DOCTOR: Never mind that now. Come on, let's get out of here.  
LODGE: Ah, no, not you. You go that way.  
SARAH: But we'll run straight into the soldiers.  
LODGE: Yeah, and while they're busy with you, I'll get away.  
DOCTOR: Oh, so much for honour amongst thieves. Hai!  
(The Doctor kicks the weapon out of Lodge's hands and throws him onto the
stage.)  
DOCTOR: Come on, quick, out of here! Come on!

**[Outside the Detention centre]**

(The building looks like a school or church hall. There is a Land Rover parked
by a gate in the wall. They get in.)  
SARAH: What are you looking for?  
DOCTOR: A piece of wire to jump the ignition. I'll try in the back.  
(The Doctor gets out and sees a weapon pointed at him.)  
NORTON: Ready for the detention centre?

**[Land Rover]**

(The Doctor and Sarah are handcuffed to each other in the back as they are
driven through leafy suburbia.)  
SARAH: Honestly, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: And how was I to know it was detention centre transport?  
SARAH: Oh well, I can see us being locked up for months. Sewing mail bags
probably. I mean, let's face it. Nobody's listened to us so far.  
(The Land Rover stops suddenly. They peer out of the back to see T Rex showing
off his big teeth.)

__**Part Two**__

**[Workshop]**

(As two soldiers run forward to shoot at the dinosaur, the Doctor and Sarah
creep out of the back and run for it. They arrive gasping at a garage workshop
and slam the doors behind them.)  
SARAH: That thing. What was it?  
DOCTOR: A Tyrannosaurus Rex. The largest and fiercest predator of all time.  
SARAH: But, but those things died out millions of years ago.  
DOCTOR: Yes, sixty five million years ago, to be precise.  
(The Doctor pulls Sarah to the workbench.)  
SARAH: What?  
(The Doctor looks through the tools as someone watches from the shadows.
Outside, the grenades have finally made the T Rex back off.)

**[Land Rover]**

SOLDIER 2: They've gone!  
SOLDIER 3: Oh no!

**[Workshop]**

(The Doctor is trying to pick Sarah's handcuffs with a small screwdriver.)  
SARAH: Ow!  
DOCTOR: Sorry.  
(He finally succeeds.)  
DOCTOR: There we are. Right, now let's review the situation. A prehistoric
monster's turned up in central London.  
SARAH: Well, how how do you know it's only central London?  
DOCTOR: Because those soldiers were talking about the central zone, weren't
they.  
SARAH: But where did that monster come from?  
DOCTOR: That's a very good question, Sarah.  
SARAH: Suppose suppose there was an egg, buried in the ground somewhere, and
somehow or other it hatched out?  
DOCTOR: What, producing a sweet little baby monster?  
SARAH: Yes. Ah. No. No, how would it grow to that size without anyone
noticing.  
DOCTOR: Perhaps somebody kept it as a pet and turned it out when it got too
big to feed.  
SARAH: Oh.  
DOCTOR: Anyway, aren't you forgetting that pterodactyl that attacked us in the
warehouse?  
SARAH: I suppose you've got the explanation, then.  
DOCTOR: Yes, as a matter of fact, I think I have.  
(A man runs for the door.)  
DOCTOR: Hello? Who are you?  
PEASANT: Back! Back, accursed wizard!  
DOCTOR: Wizard? I'm no wizard, I assure you. You've got no need to be
frightened of me.  
(The man produces a knife.)  
SARAH: Doctor, be careful.  
DOCTOR: How did you get here?  
PEASANT: The witch. She's cast a spell on me. I'll tell the priest and have
her burned!  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, of course. Look, do you know what year it is?  
SARAH: What's the name of the King?  
PEASANT: Well, Richard, of course. But he's in the Holy Land. John rules now.
Look, take the curse off me, wizard. Send me home.  
DOCTOR: I only wish I could.  
PEASANT: Send me home. Send me home or you die!  
DOCTOR: I'm afraid I don't have that power.  
(The man lunges at the Doctor. Sarah grabs him from behind, then a sound fills
the workshop and she lets the man go. He moves back to near the door and
disappears.)  
SARAH: What happened? He was going to kill you.  
DOCTOR: Fascinating. Absolutely fascinating. That was a time eddy. For a
moment there, time went backwards.  
(A vehicle pulls up outside.)  
SARAH: Doctor.  
(Sarah looks out through the doorway.)  
SARAH: Soldiers. they're searching. They're coming nearer!  
DOCTOR: Can you bolt that door?  
SARAH: No!  
DOCTOR: Hide.  
(They stand either side of the door. It opens, and the Doctor is about to give
the person entering a karate chop when he sees who it is.)  
DOCTOR: Hai! Brigadier.  
BRIGADIER: What do you think you're doing, Doctor?

**[UNIT HQ - temporary]**

BRIGADIER: It all started just after you, Doctor, and as we later discovered,
Miss Smith, went off on your last little jaunt.  
SARAH: We were helping you, and if you knew what we'd been through.  
BRIGADIER: Yes, some other time, Miss Smith, if you don't mind?  
BRIGADIER: A variety of prehistoric reptiles began to appear in the central
London area. There was, as you can imagine, considerable panic and some loss
of life.  
(The Doctor finds a bag of sugar and puts four heaped teaspoons into his mug
of tea.)  
DOCTOR: How many of these things have been seen up to now?  
BRIGADIER: Well, the pins record the sighting  
BENTON: It's a colour code, Doctor. We're using red pins for Tyrannosaurus,
blue for Triceratops, green for the Stegosaurus and pink for your actual
Pterodactyl.  
BRIGADIER: Thank you, Benton. We soon realised that these creatures only
appear in central London. We therefore evacuated the entire area and set up
this temporary HQ, which as you can see from the map, is on the periphery of
the zone.  
SARAH: You've evacuated everybody?  
BRIGADIER: Eight million people. I'm happy to say the evacuation was carried
out without a hitch. Of course the criminal element has been taking advantage
of the situation.  
SARAH: Looters, you mean. Like those people we met.  
BRIGADIER: There's been quite a bit of that, I'm afraid. But we're keeping
them under control.  
DOCTOR: Well, that's absolutely marvellous, Brigadier. Now what're you doing
about the real problem?  
BRIGADIER: Well, as soon as these creatures appear, we make sure that they're
contained within the evacuated zone, and don't wander off into populated
areas.  
DOCTOR: Well, having contained them, what do you do then?  
BRIGADIER: Ah, well, that's where you come in, Doctor. So far we've absolutely
no idea where they're coming from or come to that, where they go.  
SARAH: Where they go?  
BRIGADIER: Yes, that's one of the few good things about the entire situation.
According to my patrols, they seem to vanish. Just disappear. No one sees them
come, no one sees them go.  
SARAH: But things that size, where could they go?  
DOCTOR: Well, that's pretty obvious, isn't it, Sarah?  
SARAH: Hmm?  
DOCTOR: Back where they came from, into the past.  
(Finch and Yates enter.)  
FINCH: All right, Brigadier, you can have your extra patrols, but I warn you,
I shall expect results.  
DOCTOR: Mike, my dear fellow, how are you? Good to see you again.  
YATES: Doctor.  
FINCH: Who's this?  
BRIGADIER: Sir, this is the Doctor, our scientific advisor.  
FINCH: Oh. We've been waiting for you, you know. May I ask where you've been?  
DOCTOR: Certainly.  
FINCH: Well?  
DOCTOR: You can ask but I don't guarantee that you'll get a reply.  
BRIGADIER: Doctor, this is General Finch. He's in overall charge of the entire
operation.  
DOCTOR: Oh, is he indeed. How do you do, General.  
BRIGADIER: The Doctor's already come up with a most interesting theory, sir.
He believes these creatures are coming to us from the past.  
FINCH: Huh. Very interesting. How?  
BRIGADIER: Yes, um. Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Somebody or something is operating a temporal displacement on a very
vast scale.  
FINCH: Never mind your scientific gobbledygook.  
DOCTOR: The creatures are being brought from the past into the present,
General, staying here for a while and then returning to their own time.  
FINCH: Rubbish!  
DOCTOR: I take it then that you have a better theory.  
FINCH: Yes. Some mad scientist fellow has been secretly breeding these things.
Now they've all got away.  
SARAH: Ah, no, General, now I thought that, but if you think about it  
FINCH: Who's this?  
SARAH: Oh. Sarah Jane Smith. How do you do?  
FINCH: (to Yates) Civilians are not allowed in this zone. Have her evacuated
immediately.  
DOCTOR: Er, Miss Smith is presently acting as my assistant, General. You were
saying, my dear?  
SARAH: We have just met a man from the past. A peasant from the age of King
John. No, honestly, General, it's true.  
FINCH: I'm not staying here to listen to this rubbish.  
YATES: I think you'll find it is worth listening to the Doctor, sir. He's
given us a great deal of help in the past.  
OGDEN: Okay, out. Sergeant? Another sighting.  
BENTON: Oh, thank you, Ogden.  
BRIGADIER: Where is it, Benton?  
BENTON: Section five, sir. Somewhere here.  
FINCH: Send for the artillery right away. We shall need field guns.  
BRIGADIER: Sir.  
DOCTOR: You'll do no such thing, Brigadier.  
FINCH: I'll thank you to stop interfering  
DOCTOR: General, we need to study this creature, not shoot at it. How much do
you think we'll learn from a dead dinosaur? Come on, Brigadier. I want you to
take me down there right away.

**[Yard]**

BRIGADIER: All right, where is it?  
CORPORAL: It's behind that building, sir. I've put an observer up on the roof
keeping track of it.  
(The man on the roof gestures.)  
CORPORAL: It's coming this way, sir!  
DOCTOR: Good grief! It's a Stegosaurus. What a splendid specimen. No, no,
don't shoot. I want to take a good look at it.  
BRIGADIER: Be careful, Doctor!  
DOCTOR: Don't worry, Brigadier, it's a vegetarian.

**[UNIT HQ - temporary]**

YATES: Well, after all that business in Wales with the giant maggots, I had to
have a spot of leave. Suppose it was a reaction, really.  
SARAH: Oh, I'm not surprised.  
YATES: As soon as I get back, of course, all this business blows up.  
SARAH: It's weird seeing London like this. All those deserted streets.  
YATES: I rather like it.  
BENTON: Excuse me, sir.  
OGDEN: Trap two, over.  
YATES: Have you noticed the air?  
SARAH: Hmm?  
YATES: It's clean. No cars, no people. Do you know yesterday I saw a fox in
Piccadilly?  
SARAH: And nightingales in Berkeley Square?  
YATES: It's not impossible.  
SARAH: No. No, I like London the way it was, traffic jams and all.  
YATES: Yes, I expect you're right.  
OGDEN: Okay. Out. Sir? Message from spotter control, sir. The Doctor and the
Brigadier have arrived. Oh, the Doctor now has the monster under close
observation, Miss.

**[Yard]**

DOCTOR: Right, we'll need some rope and a strong net.  
BRIGADIER: You intend to catch it?  
DOCTOR: Yes, of course. I want to observe it under laboratory conditions. Have
you got any rope?  
CORPORAL: We've got some towing rope, sir.  
BRIGADIER: You're going to tie it up?  
DOCTOR: That's my intention, yes.  
BRIGADIER: All right, Corporal, carry on.  
CORPORAL: Right, sir.  
DOCTOR: That creature has an amiable disposition, Brigadier, and a brain about
the size of a walnut. I think we should be able to deal with it, don't you?  
CORPORAL: The rope, sir.  
BRIGADIER: Well, of all the lunatic schemes. All right then, let's give him a
hand.  
(The sound starts up, everyone stands still then moves backwards except the
Doctor, and steggy fades away.)  
BRIGADIER: It's gone!  
CORPORAL: It must have gone round the corner, sir. Should we go after it?  
DOCTOR: It's all right, Corporal, don't bother.

**[UNIT HQ - temporary]**

FINCH: Disappeared? You mean you disappeared when it got too close?  
DOCTOR: No, sir.  
FINCH: Then what happened? How did you lose it?  
BRIGADIER: I've no idea, sir. One moment we were discussing the possibility of
capturing it and the next, it had gone.  
FINCH: Vanished into thin air, I suppose?  
DOCTOR: Yes, General Finch. That is precisely what happened.  
FINCH: Did you see this happen?  
BRIGADIER: Well, not exactly.  
DOCTOR: The Brigadier and his men couldn't see what happened, sir. They were
temporally affected by a time eddy.  
FINCH: A what?  
DOCTOR: Whenever a creature appears or disappears, the temporal displacement
causes a localised distortion in time. Now as far as the people in the
immediate vicinity were concerned, time literally runs backwards, so
naturally, they'd have no recollection of what had occurred.  
FINCH: The man's mad. Temporal displacement. Time travel is impossible, we all
know that.  
SARAH: I've travelled through time, General. The Doctor knows what he's
talking about.  
BRIGADIER: Sir, suppose we accept the Doctor's theory, for the purposes of
discussion. What happens next?  
DOCTOR: Well, we must capture one of the creatures.  
FINCH: And what good will that do?  
DOCTOR: Well, I think a study of one of these dinosaurs, General, might lead
me to the source.  
YATES: It couldn't be a natural phenomenon, could it, Doctor? Something going
wrong with time?  
DOCTOR: Then why are they contained to this one area? These giant reptiles
existed all over the planet, Mike. They'd be popping up everywhere.  
SARAH: Doctor, what about that man we saw in the garage?  
DOCTOR: Well, I think he was an accident. Whoever's responsible for these
apparitions, General, is operating from somewhere in this area.  
YATES: You're overlooking one thing. This whole zone has been evacuated.  
DOCTOR: Well, that's where you're wrong, Mike. Someone's there and whoever it
is is using vast amounts of power.  
BRIGADIER: But all power's been cut off in central London. Just minimal
emergency supplies.  
DOCTOR: Then someone, Brigadier, is making their own.

**[Control room]**

(A set of numbers display on a monitor. A man in a white lab coat makes a note
on a clip board.)  
BUTLER: Power output holding steady.  
(Everyone say Hi! to  Martin Jarvis.)  
WHITAKER: Good.  
BUTLER: The next time transference is due in one hour, Professor.  
WHITAKER: It may have to wait.  
BUTLER: One must maintain the time transference on schedule. The sequence has
been carefully calculated.  
WHITAKER: How can I be expected to work on the main project when I have these
constant distractions?  
BUTLER: Well, these distractions have emptied London for us. We must keep the
authorities off balance.  
WHITAKER: Very well, Butler, but it will not be my responsibility if the
countdown is delayed.

**[Makeshift laboratory]**

(The Doctor is working at a bench in what appears to be a school biology room.
There is a diagram of the human eye on the blackboard.)  
YATES: Do you really think you can knock out a dinosaur with that thing?  
DOCTOR: Naturally.  
YATES: How?  
DOCTOR: By a simple molecular reaction.  
YATES: I see.  
DOCTOR: I doubt it. The principle hasn't really been developed on Earth yet.  
YATES: What exactly will it do?  
DOCTOR: Well, it'll temporarily neutralise creatures' brain cells.  
YATES: I didn't think these creatures had any brains?  
DOCTOR: All animals have brains of some sort, Mike.  
YATES: What'll happen to the dinosaur when you switch this thing on?  
DOCTOR: It'll faint.  
YATES: And what will you do with your monster when you've got it?  
DOCTOR: Surround it with an electrical field and wait for it to disappear.  
YATES: And what'll that tell you?  
DOCTOR: Well, the source of the power that is moving these creatures through
time.  
YATES: Will you get an accurate fix?  
DOCTOR: Mmm, pretty accurate. Enough for the Brigadier and his merry men to
round up the guilty parties anyway.  
YATES: Jolly good, Doctor. Well, I think I'd better let you get on with it.  
DOCTOR: Yes, that would be helpful.  
(Sarah enters.)  
SARAH: Doctor? Listen, Doctor, that General Finch is being impossible. What
are you making?  
DOCTOR: Oh, no. Look, ask Captain Yates, there's a good girl.  
YATES: Can I help you, Miss Smith?  
SARAH: Er, yes. That wretched General of yours, he's trying to have me
evacuated.  
YATES: You're a civilian. You've got no official status.  
SARAH: Oh, nonsense. I'm the Doctor's assistant, aren't I, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Hmm? Yes, yes, anything you like.  
SARAH: There you are.  
YATES: Tell you what, I'll fix you up with a temporary pass, but just stay out
of sight of General Finch. Excuse me.  
SARAH: Yes, thank you.  
(Yates leaves.)  
SARAH: What did you say that thing is?  
DOCTOR: I didn't.  
SARAH: Can I help at all?  
DOCTOR: No.  
SARAH: Oh, come on, Doctor. I'm supposed to be your assistant. There must be
something I can do.  
DOCTOR: Well, there is.  
SARAH: What?  
DOCTOR: Go away.  
SARAH: Oh. All right, I'll go and chat up that nice Captain Yates.  
DOCTOR: Yeah, I'm sure he'd enjoy that.  
SARAH: I'll leave you in peace then.  
(Sarah leaves and the Doctor locks the door behind her. However, that is not
the only entrance to the room.)  
BRIGADIER: Ah, there you are, Doctor. Now, what are you up to?  
DOCTOR: Oh no!

**[Control room]**

BUTLER: Our friend from UNIT is here.  
WHITAKER: What? He has strict instructions never to come here.  
BUTLER: He says there's some kind of an emergency. He must see you.  
WHITAKER: All right, bring him in. (pause) What is it?  
YATES: I'm sorry, Professor, but I thought I'd better warn you.

**[Makeshift laboratory]**

BRIGADIER: This is the Doctor, sir, our scientific advisor. Doctor, this is
the Right Honourable Charles Grover, Minister with special powers.  
GROVER: I do apologise for the interruption, Doctor. I realise how busy you
are.  
DOCTOR: Well, I'm glad somebody does.  
GROVER: I understand you may be able to help us find a solution to this
crisis.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I sincerely hope so. Aren't you the chap who started the 'Save
Planet Earth' society?  
GROVER: I had something to do with it.  
DOCTOR: You also wrote that book, Last Chance For Man, didn't you?  
GROVER: Yes, that's right.  
DOCTOR: Oh, my dear Grover, I'm delighted to meet you. This planet needs
people like you.  
BRIGADIER: Yes, of course. You two have a great deal in common. The Doctor's
very keen on this anti-pollution business.  
GROVER: And so should you be, Brigadier. It affects all our lives.  
BRIGADIER: Oh, quite, sir, quite.  
GROVER: Now I mustn't keep you, Doctor, I just wanted to make your
acquaintance.  
DOCTOR: Oh, nonsense, nonsense, no need to rush away. Come over here. Let me
explain to you what I'm doing. Now then, in the first place

**[Control room]**

WHITAKER: That's absolute nonsense. There's no way he can find us.  
YATES: If the Doctor says he can do it, I believe him. He's probably the
greatest scientist on this planet.  
WHITAKER: That is a matter of opinion.  
BUTLER: You realise what'll happen if he's right? It'll be the end of
Operation Golden Age. Everything we've planned will be ruined.  
WHITAKER: Very well, if he's such a danger to us, you will have to deal with
him.  
YATES: How?  
WHITAKER: Well, you're the soldier.  
YATES: I'll do nothing to harm the Doctor, nor will I allow him to be harmed.
If we descend to that sort of thing, we're no better than the society we
intend to replace.  
WHITAKER: Captain Yates, I respect your principles but if the Doctor succeeds
in capturing a dinosaur, then the whole project may be jeopardised.  
BUTLER: But what can we do?  
WHITAKER: You must sabotage the Doctor's stun gun.

**[Makeshift laboratory]**

(It is a substantial stun gun, a two handed affair with twin 'barrels'.)  
GROVER: Well, I admire your courage, Doctor. I only hope it works.  
DOCTOR: I think it will. All we need now is a dinosaur to try it out on.  
BRIGADIER: We're doing our best to get you one, Doctor. All my spotter patrols
are on maximum alert.  
GROVER: Tell me, Doctor, have you any theories as to why all this is
happening?  
DOCTOR: Yes. I believe these dinosaurs are being used purely as a terror
weapon in order to clear central London.  
GROVER: But why?  
DOCTOR: Well, presumably, so that some vast project can be carried out.
Something for which people will get in the way.  
GROVER: Yes, but why London? Who not the Yorkshire Moors or the Highlands of
Scotland?  
DOCTOR: Why, indeed. Well, there must be some overriding reason. There must be
something that they need that's only available to them here.  
(Benton enters.)  
BENTON: Sir, they've spotted one. Section twelve, power station. The Chief
Engineer said if we don't remove it quickly, he'll have to switch off.  
DOCTOR: Any idea what kind it is?  
BENTON: Er, a pato-something.  
DOCTOR: Apatosaurus, commonly known as the brontosaurus. Large, placid and
stupid. That's exactly what we need.  
BRIGADIER: Transport standing by, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Will you excuse us, Minister? I'll let you know as soon as we've
captured it. Come on, Brigadier.

**[Control room]**

(Whitaker hands Yates a disc about an inch across and a third deep.)  
WHITAKER: There you are, Captain Yates. Attach this device to the Doctor's
stun gun and it will be rendered completely ineffective.

**[Power station]**

(The long-necked vegetarian creature is standing around, baffled. Yates drives
up.)  
YATES: Where is it?  
CORPORAL: It's round that corner, sir.  
(The Brigadier and Doctor drive up in another Land Rover.)  
YATES: It's round there.  
DOCTOR: Jolly good. Right, let's go and take a look at it.  
(The Brigadier and the Doctor walk off, leaving the stun gun in the vehicle.)  
CORPORAL: Right, Collins, put this back there.  
COLLINS: Right, Corporal.  
(Collins reverses Yates' Land Rover out of the way, and Yates joins the
Doctor.)  
BRIGADIER: Are you sure this is the kind you want, Doctor? It's rather large.  
DOCTOR: The bigger, the better, Brigadier.  
BRIGADIER: Really, why is that?  
DOCTOR: The larger the mass, the greater the temporal displacement for my
instruments to measure.  
YATES: Doctor, suppose this gadget of yours doesn't work?  
DOCTOR: Then I shall simply turn round and come back, feeling rather foolish.  
YATES: But isn't that thing dangerous?  
DOCTOR: Not unless it's roused, Captain Yates. Mind you, I wouldn't like to
try it on a Tyrannosaurus Rex.  
BRIGADIER: Right, bring the Doctor's, that thing in my jeep. Bring it over
here.  
YATES: It's all right, Corporal. I'll get it.  
CORPORAL: Sir.  
(Yates runs back to the vehicle. He glances to see no one is looking, and
fixes the magnetic metal disc to the barrels.)  
BRIGADIER: We'll be ready with covering fire.  
DOCTOR: That won't be necessary.  
BRIGADIER: Just in case, Doctor. Stand by!  
(Yates brings the stun gun and power pack to the Doctor. The soldiers set up a
grenade launcher. The Doctor takes up a forward position and aims the stun gun
at the apatosaurus. Nothing happens. He checks the settings and connections
and power levels and tries again. Still nothing. There is a time eddy, the
apatosaurus disappears. Behind him, a T Rex roars. The Doctor tries the stun
gun again.)  
BRIGADIER: Fire!

__**Part Three**__

**[Power station]**

(The grenade explodes between the Doctor and the T Rex. The Doctor starts to
run but a second grenade burst knocks him off his feet. He staggers away,
leaving the stun gun.)  
BRIGADIER: Fire!  
(Yates draws his pistol and runs to help the Doctor.)  
BRIGADIER: Cease fire! Captain Yates!  
(Yates reaches for the stun gun, removes the disc and fires directly up at the
giant carnivore. Its eyes roll up, and Yates hurries over to the Doctor before
it crashes to the ground, unconscious.)

**[Control room]**

YATES: You tried to murder him! You deliberately materialised a savage monster
knowing it would attack him!  
BUTLER: An unavoidable mistake.  
YATES: Oh, that was no mistake. I warned you I wouldn't have the Doctor
harmed.  
BUTLER: Well, you sabotaged the stun gun.  
YATES: I agreed to delay his experiments, not to kill him.  
BUTLER: Captain Yates, may I remind you, you were the one who said he was such
a danger to us.  
YATES: Let me tell him everything, explain to him what we're trying to do?
He'll be sympathetic. He might even help us.  
WHITAKER: No, that's out of the question.  
BUTLER: If he doesn't agree with us, what happens then?  
YATES: There's no need to kill him.  
WHITAKER: He must be delayed. Now once the temporal energy has dispersed, the
creature will return to its own time and the Doctor's instruments will lead
him straight to us. Now, what stage has he reached?  
YATES: They've taken the creature to a hangar on the fringe of the zone.  
BUTLER: Then you'd better get over there, Captain Yates.  
YATES: To do what?  
BUTLER: More sabotage, I'm afraid. All you have to do is to ensure that the
Doctor's instruments don't function. The creature will return to its own time,
the Doctor will learn nothing, and we shall have the delay we need.  
YATES: And the Doctor won't be harmed?  
WHITAKER: Of course not.  
YATES: I'll do what I can.  
(Yates leaves.)  
WHITAKER: I'm not satisfied with that young man's loyalty. He's far too
concerned about this precious Doctor of his.

**[Hangar office]**

(The Doctor checks that T Rex is secure in its chains in the main hangar, and
surrounded by detectors.)  
BRIGADIER: All set up then, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Yes, I think so. Mind you, that creature isn't what I wanted at all.
What I really wanted was a brontosaurus.  
BRIGADIER: What's the difference?  
DOCTOR: The difference, Brigadier, is that the brontosaurus is a placid
vegetarian, whereas the Tyrannosaurus is the largest and fiercest flesh eater
ever known on your planet.  
SARAH: It will stay asleep, won't it, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Yes, for a while.  
BRIGADIER: Don't you worry, Miss Smith, those chains will hold him down. Well,
Doctor, now what do we do?  
DOCTOR: We sit back and wait for it to dematerialise.  
SARAH: Then perhaps I can have your attention.  
DOCTOR: Carry on, Sarah, I'm all ears.  
SARAH: Well, I've been checking up into this whole question of time travel.  
DOCTOR: You should have come to me. I know all about time travel.  
SARAH: Ah, I know you know about it, but what I'm interested in, Doctor, is
other people who know about it.  
DOCTOR: Oh, are there any?  
SARAH: Oh, one or two have dabbled.  
DOCTOR: Oh, fascinating. The trouble is the Blinovitch limitation effect. If
they could overcome that their problem's  
SARAH: I think someone has.  
DOCTOR: What, on this planet?  
SARAH: This is the only one I've been able to check up on, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Oh, yes, yes, of course. Er, let's see now, there was this this
Chinese scientist called Chun Sen. Oh, hang about, he hasn't been born yet,
has he.  
SARAH: Quite, but there is a man called Whitaker. Now he's the leading
scientist in this field.  
BRIGADIER: Whitaker. That name rings a bell.  
SARAH: He claimed to have developed a workable theory of time travel.  
BRIGADIER: I remember. He applied for a big government grant. It was refused.  
DOCTOR: Oh, why?  
SARAH: Whitaker was always an outsider, always mixed up in quarrels with other
scientists. No one believed his theory would work.  
BRIGADIER: Yes, that's right. All the government scientific advisors said the
fellow was a crank. What about him?  
SARAH: He's disappeared.  
DOCTOR: Has he indeed?  
SARAH: About six months ago, he completely vanished. I checked with my
newspaper contacts up north. No trace.  
DOCTOR: And you think he could be behind all this?  
SARAH: Well, it's a possibility. He was a brilliant scientist, and he must
have been bitterly disappointed when the government refused that grant.  
DOCTOR: You could be right, Sarah. It's worth checking up on.  
BRIGADIER: Yes, I'll get on to it. Intelligence records may have something on
him.  
DOCTOR: Yeah, I'd like to see the application for that grant. See the man's
working papers.  
BRIGADIER: Right. They must be on file somewhere.  
DOCTOR: Oh, Brigadier, have your fellows brought the Tardis back to UNIT HQ
for me yet?  
BRIGADIER: Yes, should be there by now.  
DOCTOR: Could you give me a run down there?  
BRIGADIER: Yes, of course.  
DOCTOR: Good, thanks, there's one or two things inside I think I might need.  
SARAH: Oh, what about your little pet out there?  
DOCTOR: Oh, he'll be all right for a while. You've placed guards?  
BRIGADIER: General Finch has lent me a squad.  
DOCTOR: Good.  
SARAH: But suppose it dematerialises while you're not here?  
DOCTOR: Then my instruments will obtain the necessary readings. Coming?  
SARAH: Yes, yes. Er, Brigadier?  
BRIGADIER: Mmm?  
SARAH: Can I bring a camera back here with me?  
BRIGADIER: Whatever for?  
SARAH: Well, for my story. I'm a journalist, remember? You don't think I'm
going to miss an opportunity like this?  
BRIGADIER: I am sorry, Miss Smith. This whole affair's under strict security
black-out. You can take your photographs when the crisis is passed.  
SARAH: Oh! When the crisis is passed, there won't be anything to photograph.  
(Everyone leaves. A short time later, Yates enters and looks over the
monitoring equipment.)

**[Makeshift laboratory]**

BRIGADIER: The Minister has some information for you, Doctor, about this
elusive fellow Whitaker.  
DOCTOR: Have you, sir?  
GROVER: I was chairman of the committee that considered his application for a
government grant.  
DOCTOR: So you've seen his working papers?  
GROVER: Oh, yes, not that I understood them, of course, but my scientific
colleagues on the committee assured me that they were utter nonsense.  
DOCTOR: So you don't think that he could be behind what's been happening here.  
GROVER: Oh, out of the question. I'm afraid the poor fellow's just a harmless
crank.  
SARAH: That's not what I've heard, Minister. According to my sources he's a
brilliant scientist.  
GROVER: May I ask what are your sources?  
SARAH: His colleagues at Oxford, the science correspondent of The Times and
the editor of Nature.  
GROVER: He may be brilliant in other fields, Miss Smith, but as far as his
time travel theory is concerned, I was assured it's worthless. Doctor, I
understand that you have set up an experiment which may give us the answer to
all this?  
DOCTOR: Yeah, well, it's a possibility, Minister, but I can't guarantee it.  
GROVER: I'd be very interested to hear about it.  
BRIGADIER: Well, why don't we go to my office, sir? It'll be more comfortable
there.  
GROVER: Thank you very much.  
DOCTOR: That's a good idea.  
GROVER: General Finch?  
FINCH: I must be getting back to HQ, sir.  
BRIGADIER: This way, sir.  
GROVER: Thank you.  
(The Brigadier, Doctor and Grover leave.)  
SARAH: Isn't it marvellous. The one real clue to this whole business and they
totally ignore it.  
FINCH: I'm interested, Miss Smith. Where is this fellow Whitaker?  
SARAH: Well, that's just it, you see. No one knows.  
FINCH: No one?  
SARAH: He vanished about six months ago. Just upped and left home.  
FINCH: Well, people do disappear, change their names, start a new life for
themselves.  
SARAH: No, it's too big a coincidence. I'm not going to let go of this.  
FINCH: What can you do?  
SARAH: Keep looking until I find him. I'll make them believe me. The
Brigadier's being completely uncooperative. He wouldn't even let me get some
photographs of that monster they've got chained down.  
FINCH: Well, you've got a pass, haven't you?  
SARAH: Oh! I tried! When I got back there, they wouldn't let me in. Said I had
to have a special pass.  
FINCH: Special army pass from my HQ.  
SARAH: You couldn't give me a pass, could you? I wouldn't publish anything
until it was all over and I got proper permission.  
FINCH: I don't carry passes about with me, you know. Look, take this to my HQ.  
(Finch writes on a piece of paper.)  
FINCH: See my adjutant. He'll fix you up.  
SARAH: Oh, that's marvellous! Where is your HQ?  
FINCH: Show this to my driver. He'll take you there.  
SARAH: Oh, what about you?  
FINCH: I've got one or two things to settle here.  
SARAH: Thank you.  
(Later, while Yates is in the hangar looking at the dinosaur, the Doctor and
Brigadier return.)  
DOCTOR: What a charming fellow. You know, it's lucky for you, Brigadier, that
somebody with some sense is in charge of this operation.  
BRIGADIER: Unfortunately General Finch is in charge of the military side.  
DOCTOR: Yes, quite. Where's Sarah?  
BRIGADIER: Maybe General Finch took her out to dinner.  
DOCTOR: Huh! Didn't look like the beginnings of a beautiful friendship to me.
Oh, by the way, Brigadier? I've got to get down to the hanger. Could you lend
me a jeep?  
BRIGADIER: Yes.  
(The Brigadier makes a telephone call.)  
BRIGADIER: Brigadier speaking. Lay on a jeep for the Doctor, will you? Oh, and
did you see Miss Smith leave here? Oh, thank you. She went off in the
General's car.  
DOCTOR: Oh.

**[Hangar office]**

(Sarah has got her camera and takes a picture of T Rex through the observation
window. The automatic flash goes off. More flashes and the dinosaur's eyes
flicker. A few more then Sarah decides on some close ups. She goes into the
hangar proper and takes more flash photographs within arms reach of the
monster. As she puts down the camera to change the film, T Rex rises up. Sarah
screams and runs back to the office. The external door is locked. The dinosaur
rises onto its hind legs, roaring. Meanwhile, the Doctor is driving through
surburbia.)  
SARAH: Help! Someone! Open the door! Help! Open the door, for God's sake!  
(T Rex uses its tail to batter the wall between it at Sarah.  
SARAH: Help! Can anyone hear me? I can't get out! The door's stuck! Help me!  
(The tail smashes the window and wall. A piece of timber falls on Sarah's
head, knocking her out and leaving her with a nasty cut above her eye. A few
moments later, the Doctor enters.)  
DOCTOR: Come on, up! Come on! Come on, get up. That's it!  
(The Doctor drags the groggy Sarah along the side of the buildings while T Rex
smashes the hangar to pieces. He bundles her into the Land Rover as it comes
bursting through the wall.)

**[Makeshift laboratory]**

DOCTOR: It's a nasty bump. Nothing too serious. How do you feel?  
SARAH: Scared. Do you realise somebody tried to kill me?  
BRIGADIER: I don't want to seem unsympathetic, Miss Smith, but you have only
got yourself to blame.  
SARAH: Well, somebody locked that door so I couldn't get out.  
DOCTOR: She's right, you know, Brigadier. That door was bolted on the outside.  
BRIGADIER: Maybe one of the soldiers didn't realise she was in there.  
(Benton enters with a soldier carrying the Doctor's time eddy monitoring
equipment.)  
BENTON: Here we are, Doctor. Hasn't been knocked about too much.  
DOCTOR: Thanks, Sergeant. Put it down there, will you? When the creature
vanished, it was still in the electrical forcefield, Brigadier, so we should
learn something.  
(Benton has some of the chains that were holding T Rex down. A link has been
cut.)  
BENTON: We found this, sir. They were all like that. Cut clean through.  
DOCTOR: And this machine's been sabotaged. There's not a single reading.  
BRIGADIER: Dismissed! No, not you, Benton.  
(The soldier leaves.)  
DOCTOR: Well, at least we've learnt something, Brigadier. Somebody inside this
organisation is working against us.  
BENTON: Yes, but what I can't understand, sir, is why should anyone want to
cut those chains?  
DOCTOR: It was a deliberate attempt on Sarah's life.  
BRIGADIER: Why should anybody want to kill her?  
BENTON: They were probably after you, Doctor. I mean, they expected you to go
back there.  
BRIGADIER: Yes, of course, that'll be it. Well, Doctor, any suggestions?  
DOCTOR: Yes, I shall build another detector.  
BRIGADIER: We haven't got to capture another dinosaur?  
DOCTOR: No, no. No, this time I'm going to try something different. I'm going
to build a portable device to detect that power source.  
BRIGADIER: Well, why didn't you do that in the first place?  
DOCTOR: Because, Brigadier, it cannot be as accurate or as powerful as this
would have been. But it could give us the general direction.  
SARAH: Doctor? Exactly how much energy would be needed to make these things
appear?  
DOCTOR: Oh, something like a small nuclear generator.  
SARAH: Then why don't we look for one?  
BRIGADIER: Miss Smith, that was one of the first things that occurred to me. I
made a thorough check and I can assure you that there are no unaccounted for
nuclear generators in the central London area.  
DOCTOR: No, he's right you know, Sarah. It is pretty unlikely, isn't it. Look,
why don't you try and get some rest.  
SARAH: All right.  
DOCTOR: Right, I'll be getting on with it.  
(The Doctor goes into the Tardis.)  
BRIGADIER: I've got yet another planning conference with General Finch. Look
after Miss Smith, Benton. BENTON: Right, sir.  
(The Brigadier leaves.)  
BENTON: Well, would you like a cup of tea or anything?  
SARAH: Typical! Run away and play while the grown-ups get on with the real
work.  
BENTON: What do you mean?  
SARAH: The power's coming from somewhere, right? So there must be an
independent source.  
BENTON: I suppose so, but where would you start  
SARAH: So if it is a nuclear reactor it would have been designed and
assembled, and all that could be traced. There'd be records.  
BENTON: The Brigadier's checked all that, Miss. If there was anything there
then he would have found it.  
SARAH: Well, maybe it was all secret.  
BENTON: Too secret for the Brigadier to know about?  
SARAH: Yes, why not? Can you get me some transport?  
BENTON: Oh no, I couldn't do that.  
SARAH: Oh, they told you to look after me. Come on.  
BENTON: Well, where do you want to go, and what shall I tell the Doctor?  
SARAH: Well, tell him. Tell him I've gone out to play, hmm? Come on.  
BENTON: (silent) Oh no.

**[Grover's office]**

(Grover opens his own office door.)  
GROVER: Come in! What a pleasant surprise.  
SARAH: I don't suppose you remember, Minister, but we met briefly at UNIT.  
GROVER: You're far too modest, Miss Smith. Of course I remember. I'm sorry you
had to find your own way here but I'm down to a skeleton staff.  
SARAH: Oh, thank you.  
GROVER: However, I can offer you a cup of tea. We have our own little
generator down in the basement. Petrol driven. Can I get you a cup?  
SARAH: Er, no, not at the moment, thank you. I'm sorry to bother you like
this, but you seem to be the only member of the government still in London.  
GROVER: Oh, I am. The rest all shot off to Harrogate, but I told the Prime
Minister if I'm in charge, I'm going to stay here, on the spot. Now, what can
I do for you?  
SARAH: Well, you know the Doctor's theory about these materialisations? They
must need a tremendous energy force.  
GROVER: Yes?  
SARAH: Well, the Doctor said it would have to be something like a nuclear
generator and that started me remembering something. Wasn't there a plan once
to build underground quarters for the government in the event of an atomic
war?  
GROVER: Yes, back in the cold war days. Oh, I see what you're getting at. Oh,
I don't think any of them were ever built, you know.  
SARAH: Are you sure of that? Each of those places was to have its own nuclear
generator.  
GROVER: That's right. I was a junior backbencher at the time but I remember
plans were made and then shelved when the situation eased.  
SARAH: But suppose one was built, right here in London.  
GROVER: That's a very ingenious theory, young lady. What does the Brigadier
think about it, or the Doctor?  
SARAH: I'm not telling anyone about it until I can get some evidence.  
GROVER: I wonder, if it could have happened as you say.  
SARAH: Oh, I thought if I came to you, you could help me check up on it.  
GROVER: And so I can. In there are confidential ministerial files going back
years. Let's take a look.  
SARAH: Thank you.

**[Filing room]**

(Grover shows Sarah into an adjoining room full of metal filing cabinets. A
panel slides across the door when he closes it behind him. Sarah reads a clip
board on top of a cabinet, which is some sort of index.)  
GROVER: Fantastic filing system they have in here. I hardly understand it
myself, but then of course I've only been Minister for six months.  
SARAH: Could it be this? Top secret construction projects.  
GROVER: I wonder? Number two three nine five. Now that should be over here
somewhere. No, there's nothing here. This is all about building RAF early
warning stations in Scotland.  
SARAH: Well, perhaps one of the other files in the same category?  
GROVER: Oh, we can but look. Good Lord! You're right. Look.  
SARAH: They built it twenty years ago, right in the centre of London.  
GROVER: And there's a map here, showing its exact position.  
SARAH: Well, there's Whitehall, so this must. It's here. It's right here. It
must be under this building!  
(Grover opens the sliding door. Beyond it is a passageway of red painted
brick, with a fire extinguisher and lighting.) GROVER: After you, Miss Smith.

**[Makeshift laboratory]**

(The Doctor comes out of the Tardis.)  
DOCTOR: Sergeant? Sergeant Benton?  
(Benton enters.)  
BENTON: Yes, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Look, I'll need some more electronic equipment. Can you organise it?  
BENTON: Yes, of course.  
DOCTOR: Ah, thanks very much. How's Miss Smith?  
BENTON: Oh, fine, as far as I know.  
DOCTOR: Er, did you give her somewhere to rest?  
BENTON: Well, she didn't want to rest. I got her some transport and she shot
off somewhere.  
DOCTOR: Oh, where?  
BENTON: She wouldn't say. She said to tell you she'd gone out to play.  
DOCTOR: You know, sometimes that girl baffles me.

**[Underground room]**

(The walls are of brick painted red. Butler has taken off his lab coat and
joined them.)  
SARAH: You're mad. You're absolutely raving mad!  
GROVER: On the contrary, Miss Smith, my associates and I are on the only ones
who are sane.  
SARAH: Creating monsters in central London?  
GROVER: There's a very good reason for it, which you will one day learn. I'm
afraid I must leave you.  
SARAH: They'll find me, you know.  
GROVER: I very much doubt it, Miss Smith. Not where you're going.  
(Butler and Grover leave, locking the door. Sarah sits in a tall backed chair
in the middle of the room. The lights begin to flash blue. She turns the chair
but cannot avoid them. Finally her eyes glaze over.)

**[Spaceship - small room]**

(When she wakes up, she is lying down and wearing a denim suit. A young man in
similar clothing is smiling at her.)  
MARK: Welcome, sister.  
SARAH: Who are you? Where am I?  
MARK: My name is Mark. I welcome you to the people.  
SARAH: What people?  
MARK: You'll soon remember.  
SARAH: And where is this?  
MARK: The spaceship. You see, it's all come true.  
SARAH: What's going on? Where am I?  
MARK: We're on our way. Soon we shall arrive on the planet that's to be our
new home.  
SARAH: Planet? Spaceship? What are you talking about?  
(Mark uncovers a porthole and Sarah looks out into the inky blackness, where
there is only a half-sunlit planet visible in the distance.)  
MARK: We left Earth three months ago.

__**Part Four**__

**[Makeshift laboratory]**

(Finch and Yates enter.)  
FINCH: I'd like an explanation of this latest fiasco, Brigadier. You capture a
dinosaur and lose it again, an aircraft hangar is wrecked, and into the
bargain, Miss Smith is almost killed. Now why is this man allowed to persist
in his ridiculous and useless schemes? You deny that absolutely nothing has
been achieved?  
DOCTOR: Nothing has been achieved, General Finch, because of sabotage. Now the
chains holding the Tyrannosaurus were deliberately severed, and somebody
attempted to murder Miss Smith by locking her in the hanger with the creature.  
(Yates is unhappy to hear all this.)  
DOCTOR: To top it all, my apparatus has been messed about with. However, all
that's in the past now. I've got a new scheme. So if you'll excuse me, I'll be
getting on with it. Brigadier, did you bring over that new car of mine when
you moved your headquarters?  
BRIGADIER: Yes, I think so. It should be in the garage with the rest of our
transport.  
FINCH: What are you up to now?  
BRIGADIER: I'll explain in a moment, sir. Better just see the Doctor on his
way.  
(The Brigadier and the Doctor leave.)  
YATES: I'd like to know what's been going on, sir.  
FINCH: I've no idea what you're talking about.  
YATES: I agreed to sabotage the Doctor's apparatus and delay his experiment,
but I didn't agree to murder.

**[Outside UNIT HQ - temporary]**

BRIGADIER: You'll never get it off the ground, Doctor. Wouldn't you rather
have a jeep?  
DOCTOR: Not a bit of it, Brigadier. This new car of mine is exactly what I
need. Speed is of the essence, you know.  
BRIGADIER: Well, take care. Call in as soon as you have any information.  
DOCTOR: Right.  
(The new Who-mobile is a sort of two seater mini-hovercraft with very upswept
wings at the back and a pair of jet exhausts pointing out between them. The
Doctor drives it to Smithfield Market, where he stops and checks his portable
time eddy detector. He consults the map and moves off again.)

**[Spaceship]**

(Sarah examines a clay bowl. Mark enters with an older woman wearing beige and
an older man in a green jacket.)  
MARK: Here she is.  
RUTH: Don't worry, my dear. We'll look after you.  
(Everyone say Hi to  Carmen Silvera, making a return visit.)  
ADAM: You're the first to recover.  
RUTH: You're bound to feel a little strange at first.  
SARAH: Who are you?  
ADAM: We're the elders.  
SARAH: How did I get here?  
RUTH: You must have been chosen.  
SARAH: Wait a minute. I know you. You're Lady Cullingford.  
RUTH: Here I am Ruth.  
SARAH: I interviewed you about that Private Member's Bill of yours against the
pollution of rivers. And you're Nigel Castle, the novelist.  
ADAM: Not any more. I have better work for my hands.  
(Adam picks up the clay bowl.)  
SARAH: I know you too. You're  
MARK: John Crighton.  
SARAH: The athlete. You jumped two point three six two metres in the last
Olympics.  
ADAM: All that's behind us now.  
RUTH: And you were a journalist?  
SARAH: I still am. Where are we going?  
MARK: I told you, to New Earth.  
SARAH: Sorry, I seem to have forgotten.  
ADAM: A small planet, very much like the Earth we've left behind, but at an
earlier stage of development.  
RUTH: Still pure, undefiled by the evil of man's technology. Air that is still
clean to breathe.  
MARK: Simple pastoral people, innocent and unspoiled.  
ADAM: It'll be our task to guide them. To see that the evil developed on Earth
will not be repeated.  
SARAH: Our task? Just the four of us?  
MARK: There are over two hundred of us on this ship.  
(Mark switches on a monitor. It shows images of figures lying on shelves four
high in sections A and C.)  
MARK: You see? They'll all be recovering soon, just as you did.  
(Mark turns off the monitor.)  
ADAM: And this is only one of the ships of the fleet. Show her, Mark.  
(The monitor shows four identical spaceships.)  
MARK: There are seven ships in all.  
SARAH: Those people. Why were they all asleep?  
ADAM: To save food and oxygen. It was all explained to you.  
RUTH: It's a three month journey, and almost over.  
SARAH: I've been here on this spaceship for three months?  
MARK: We all have.  
SARAH: I can't believe it!  
(Sarah touches the bump she got in the hangar a few hours ago.)  
SARAH: Three months?

**[London]**

(The Doctor stops and takes another reading, then drives off again eagerly. He
pulls up outside an Underground station and tries again. The reading goes up
to four out of maximum five when he points it at the closed station, so he
goes over an picks the lock on the gates.)

**[Underground station]**

(Carrying the detector and a large torch, the Doctor heads down to a platform,
where a handkerchief test shows air being pulled out of the station through a
grille. He hears a noise, and hides underneath a bench as Butler comes onto
the platform and puts a key in the lock of a maintenance door before pressing
one of the louvres. There is the sound of a lift arriving. Butler opens the
door and steps into a lit cupboard containing the overalls and mops. He shuts
the door, there is the lift sound and the light disappears. In the bunker,
Butler heads down the corridor to the reactor room and communications room,
according to the sign on the wall. Cabinet room and sleeping quarters and
Sickbay are the other way.  
The Doctor comes out of hiding and tries the door louvres. The lift heads up
to him as he picks the lock. The Doctor puts down his torch and gets inside
the lift, then looks for the switch to make it go down again. It turns out to
be the third coat hook from the door, which swivels 180 degrees.)

**[Control room]**

(The lift light flashes on a diagram of the underground complex. According to
this, the Cabinet room and reactor room are next to each other. There is also
a Sick bay, Minister's day room and Royal Suite. The Control room is in the
centre of the complex.)  
BUTLER: I trust you now have everything you need, Professor?  
WHITAKER: I don't know yet. If I need more equipment, you'll have to provide
it.  
BUTLER: It isn't easy getting this stuff for you. Every time I go onto those
streets I risk being shot as a looter.  
WHITAKER: Well, you could take the Ministry  
(They spot the flashing light.)  
BUTLER: Someone's using the blue lift.  
(The Doctor steps out of the lift, looks at the sign on the wall and goes the
same way that Butler did. He is watched on CCTV.)  
BUTLER: It's him. Yt's the Doctor, UNIT's scientific advisor. How did he find
us?  
WHITAKER: Presumably you led him here.  
BUTLER: Needn't be such a bad thing. We can deal with him here and now. Let's
see. He's going towards the reactor.  
(Butler presses one of many red buttons on a panel, and a steel shutter slams
down in front of the Reactor room door just as the Doctor gets there. The
Doctor heads down another passageway, and a shutter comes down behind him.)  
WHITAKER: He's heading towards the Cabinet room.  
BUTLER: Right.  
(The Doctor turns left in front of a lift, turns another corner and gets a
shutter coming down in front of him this time. Butler sniggers. The Doctor is
now trapped outside a lift, which opens for him. The Doctor steps in and is
taken upwards. There are no overalls and mops in this one, but the same blue
light flashes on the diagram.)  
BUTLER: He's in the lift. Is everything ready?  
(Whitaker is absorbed at another monitor with a set of yellow levers in front
of it. The monitor shows a pterodactyl basking on a boulder.)  
BUTLER: Excellent.  
(Gently, Whitaker pulls back one lever and a time eddy picks up the overgrown
bat.)

**[Underground station]**

(The Doctor steps out of the lift and stoops for his torch and eddy detector.
The squawk of the pterodactyl fills the air as it swoops past him. The Doctor
ducks back into the lift, which now has the mops and buckets back in it, and
uses one to drive back the dinosaur as it pokes its beak in to try and get at
him. Then he comes out, fends it off with the mop again and runs up the
stairs, leaving his equipment behind.)

**[Spaceship]**

SARAH: Don't you think that people have a right to choose what kind of life
they want?  
RUTH: People on Earth were allowed to choose. And see what kind of a world
they made. Moral degradation, permissiveness, usury, cheating, lying, cruelty.  
SARAH: There's also a lot of love and kindness and honesty. You've got a
warped view of things.  
RUTH: You mustn't say such things.  
SARAH: I'll say whatever I like.  
MARK: The strain of reawakening must have disturbed her mind.  
SARAH: There's nothing wrong with my mind.  
ADAM: I was assured that everyone had been most carefully selected. I don't
think you're going to be happy with us. If you feel like this, why did you
join us?  
SARAH: I didn't join you. I was brought here against my will.  
RUTH: We shall have to do something about this. She'll be a disruptive
influence.  
ADAM: I think you'd better come with me.  
SARAH: Where to?  
RUTH: You can't be allowed to go about saying these things. You'll have to be
re-educated.

**[Underground station]**

(The Doctor returns with the Brigadier, in a Land Rover. He leads the way
underground with a pencil light.)  
DOCTOR: Mind the steps, Brigadier. Right, now it's through here.  
(The Doctor picks up his big torch and opens the cupboard door.)  
DOCTOR: Here it is.

**[Blue lift]**

DOCTOR: Don't just stand there. Come on in. Close the door. Now the activating
mechanism is right here.  
(But there are no pegs on the wall.)  
BRIGADIER: Where?  
DOCTOR: Well, it was there, but now it seems to have gone.  
BRIGADIER: You sure we've come to the right place?  
DOCTOR: Sure? Of course I'm sure.

**[Grover's office]**

DOCTOR: Look, I tell you that it is there, Minister. Somewhere beneath that
underground station is some kind of emergency shelter for the government.  
GROVER: You must have been talking to Miss Smith.  
DOCTOR: Oh, what about?  
GROVER: Didn't she tell you? She came to me with the most marvellous theory
about such a place having been built under central London.  
DOCTOR: And had it?  
GROVER: I'm afraid not. We went through the files together. The place was
planned but it was never built.  
BRIGADIER: You're sure of that, sir?  
GROVER: Well, I had the file here somewhere after we'd looked at it. There we
are.  
BRIGADIER: Project abandoned. No further action to be taken. See, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: You'll forgive me, Minister, if I prefer to believe the evidence of my
own eyes. Where did Miss Smith go to after she visited you?  
GROVER: Back to UNIT HQ. I sent her in my own car.  
DOCTOR: Are you quite certain?  
GROVER: I can check for you.  
DOCTOR: Thank you, sir.  
GROVER: (into intercom.) Is my chauffeur still there?  
MAN [OC]: Yes, sir. Shall I tell him to bring the car round?  
GROVER: No, tell him to come in here, please.  
MAN [OC]: Yes, sir.  
GROVER: Would you two like a cup of tea? I've become quite an expert.  
BRIGADIER: That's very kind of you, sir. I don't think so just at the moment.  
GROVER: Come in. (Butler enters, wearing a chauffeur's uniform.)  
BUTLER: You wanted me, sir?  
GROVER: The young lady from UNIT who was visiting me. Where did you take her?  
BUTLER: Well, back to UNIT HQ, sir.  
DOCTOR: Are you quite sure of that?  
BUTLER: Oh yes, sir. I saw her go inside.

**[Spaceship 'reminder' room]**

(Sarah is being indoctrinated, watching a film showing buckets of filth being
dredged.)  
BUTLER [OC]: Ever since the dawn of the Industrial Revolution, man has
continued to pollute the planet which until now has been his only home.
Chemical and industrial wastes have caused widespread poisoning of the air and
the rivers. Even the oceans are  
(The room goes quiet. Mark enters with a tray.)  
MARK: I've brought you something to eat.  
(A small piece of bread and a drink.)  
SARAH: Not going to get overweight, am I.  
MARK: That's pure bread.  
SARAH: But not much of it.  
MARK: Once you've been reminded, you'll eat with the rest of us.  
SARAH: Reminded?  
MARK: Of the truth. We all come in here from time to time to be reminded of
the purposes of our mission.  
SARAH: You're here because you want to be. I don't.  
MARK: You must have been selected, otherwise why would you be here?  
SARAH: I was brought here. Kidnapped!  
MARK: Watch the film. It'll remind you of the truth.  
SARAH: I want to talk to you!  
(Mark leaves and the film restarts.)  
BUTLER [OC]: Dangerous concentrations of cumulative poisons such as mercury
are already being found in fish and when fish start to die, when the very seas
where life began are now becoming lifeless and stinking

**[Spaceship]**

RUTH: We can't afford this girl's disruptive influence.  
ADAM: One girl among so many of us. Can't do much harm.  
RUTH: She could corrupt the whole of our group. We can't afford the risk.  
MARK: What can we do?  
RUTH: If she doesn't respond to re-education, we shall have to destroy her.

**[Control room]**

WHITAKER: Final tests have all been positive. Now, once the power build-up
from the reactor is complete, we shall be ready to commence the countdown.  
GROVER: And when the experiment is over the colonists and their spaceship will
be able to emerge onto their new Earth.  
FINCH: How much longer before this countdown begins?  
WHITAKER: Oh, a matter of hours.  
FINCH: I'm under great pressure from the government. The whole country's been
disrupted by this evacuation of London.  
GROVER: It won't be for much longer.  
FINCH: They're on to Whitaker, you know? Trying to trace him.  
BUTLER: Remember, the Doctor's already discovered the existence of this place.  
YATES: I warned you not to underestimate him.  
GROVER: I agree he's a very intelligent man. I think he suspects my
involvement.  
FINCH: We ought to dispose of him.  
YATES: No, sir. We must not descend to those methods.  
GROVER: Quite right, Captain Yates. But perhaps there's another way.  
FINCH: What do you mean?  
GROVER: You, General Finch, will be able to block the Brigadier from taking
positive action in finding this place. As far as the Doctor is concerned, we
must discredit him.

**[Makeshift laboratory]**

BRIGADIER: Apart from your story, Doctor, which, forgive me, is pretty
unbelievable, there isn't a shred of evidence to suggest that this place
exists. Now you heard the Minister yourself. It was never built.  
DOCTOR: Grover was covering up because he's implicated himself.  
BRIGADIER: And what possible reason could the Minister have for being involved
in the apparition of these monsters?  
DOCTOR: The monsters are a side-issue, Brigadier, a device to clear central
London. No, some vast scheme is underway, I'm sure of it, and it's rapidly
moving towards its climax.  
BRIGADIER: Well, what do you expect me to do?  
DOCTOR: Get back to that underground station with explosives.  
BRIGADIER: I can't do that without authority. I need permission from General
Finch.  
DOCTOR: Then get it!  
BRIGADIER: All right, Doctor, I'll do my best, vut he'll probably insist on
referring it to the Minister, And if your theory's true, that's not going to
get us anywhere.  
(The Brigadier leaves. Benton enters through the other door.)  
BENTON: There's a call for you, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Who is it?  
BENTON: He wouldn't give his name. He said he'd only talk to you. (into phone)
Hello, would you put the Doctor's call through to here, please? Oh, thank you.
Doctor.  
(Benton leaves.)  
DOCTOR: (into phone.) Hello?

**[Control room]**

WHITAKER: Is that you, Doctor?  
DOCTOR [OC]: Yes, who's that?  
WHITAKER: Er, my name is Whitaker, Doctor.

**[Makeshift laboratory]**

WHITAKER [OC]: I understand you've been trying to trace me.  
DOCTOR: Whitaker. The man with the time travel theories. Tell me, are you
responsible for these apparitions?

**[Control room]**

WHITAKER: Well, in a way, but I was tricked. It's the Minister, Grover. He
told me I was working on a government project. But I've escaped and now
they're after me.  
DOCTOR [OC]: Where are you now?  
WHITAKER: I'm in the hangar where you were conducting your experiments. I
hoped you'd be here.

**[Makeshift laboratory]**

DOCTOR: Well look, can you get down to UNIT headquarters, it's in a ma  
WHITAKER [OC]: I can't. I'm afraid to move.  
DOCTOR: Oh, all right. You stay where you are. I'll come to you.

**[Control room]**

WHITAKER: Can you come alone, Doctor? I don't trust anyone else.

**[Makeshift laboratory]**

DOCTOR: Yes, all right. I'll be with you as soon as I can. Goodbye.

**[Hangar office]**

DOCTOR: Whitaker?  
(There is a large device with a transparent dome on the office table.)

**[Control room]**

(Butler watches the Doctor on a monitor while Whitaker is at the time eddy
machine.)  
BUTLER: He's arrived.  
WHITAKER: Good. I'm ready for him.

**[Hangar office]**

DOCTOR: Whitaker? Whitaker, where are you?  
(A time eddy starts up and a stegosaurus appears in the hangar. Finch and the
Brigadier enter the office with two soldiers.)  
FINCH: There's your monster maker, Brigadier. Caught in the act.

__**Part Five**__

**[Hangar office]**

BRIGADIER: Doctor, you're under arrest.

**[Spaceship 'reminder' room]**

(The indoctrination film has moved on to man's inhumanity towards man.)  
BUTLER [OC]: Overcrowding in man, as in all other animal species, increases
hostility and aggression, leading to the greatest crime of all, war. With the
development of the atomic bomb, man now has the choice of destroying his
planet quickly, through war, or slowly, through pollution.  
(The film stops as Mark enters.)  
MARK: How are you feeling now?  
SARAH: Hungry, tired and I've got a headache.  
MARK: Sarah, you're in grave danger.  
SARAH: Oh, what's that supposed to mean?  
MARK: The elders are very dedicated to our cause. They are not going to permit
a disruptive influence.  
SARAH: You mean they'll kill me? Perhaps the time that I spent in suspended
animation has affected my thinking in some ways? Take me back to the elders.
Let me talk to them again.  
MARK: Yes, of course.  
(Mark opens the door. Sarah jabs her elbow into his midriff and runs out,
locking him in.)  
MARK: Sarah! Sarah!

**[UNIT HQ - temporary]**

(Night has fallen when the Doctor is escorted in at gunpoint. Benton and Yates
stand.)  
FINCH: All right. Captain Yates, take this man and lock him up.  
BRIGADIER: Sir, aren't we going to question him first?  
FINCH: There's no time for that now. I must report his capture to the
Minister.  
DOCTOR: Yes, and no doubt he'll be very pleased to hear it, since he arranged
the whole thing.  
FINCH: You are in an extremely dangerous position, Doctor. I advise you to
keep silent.  
DOCTOR: Oh, that's just what you want, isn't it, my silence?  
BRIGADIER: We really should interrogate this man now, sir. Trying to discover
his base, the names of his associates.  
FINCH: All that can come later.  
DOCTOR: Yes, well now that you've caught me, General, you can end the
evacuation and return your eight million Londoners, can't you.  
FINCH: That decision doesn't rest with me. It rests with the Prime Minister.
Captain Yates?  
YATES: Sir?  
FINCH: Until further orders, you'll keep that man under close arrest. Come
with me, Brigadier.  
BRIGADIER: Sir?  
FINCH: I want you with me when I make my report. Brigadier?  
(Finch and the Brigadier leave.)  
DOCTOR: Now listen to me, Mike. We haven't got much time. I want you to raise
all the men you can muster and some kind of high explosive. Now I've got a
pretty good idea where their base is.  
YATES: Sergeant Benton?  
BENTON: Sir?  
YATES: Take the Doctor to a cell and lock him up.  
BENTON: Sir?  
YATES: Keep him under constant guard. He's to talk to no one.  
DOCTOR: So it was you, Mike.  
YATES: I'm sorry, Doctor. I'll be in the Brigadier's office.  
(Yates leaves.)  
BENTON: Right, that empty storeroom. Fix it up as a temporary cell. Check the
lock on the door and do something about barring the windows. Oh, and put in a
camp bed. Now move.  
(The soldiers leave.)  
BENTON: All right, Doctor, what's going on?  
DOCTOR: Captain Yates is the man inside who's working against us.  
BENTON: Come on, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: I'm afraid it's true.  
BENTON: Well, what about the Brigadier?  
DOCTOR: What indeed?  
BENTON: Right then, Doctor, you'd better get busy.  
DOCTOR: What?  
BENTON: You'd better start overpowering me, hadn't you. You know, a bit of
your Venusian oojah?  
DOCTOR: Thank you, Sergeant Benton.  
DOCTOR: Are you ready?  
BENTON: Yeah!  
(Benton tenses and shuts his eyes tight. The Doctor uses the pressure grip at
the back of Benton's neck to put him to sleep.)

**[Control room]**

GROVER: Sorry, gentlemen. Well, the Doctor's safely under arrest at UNIT
headquarters.  
WHITAKER: How long will they hold him?  
GROVER: Long enough. Soon the Doctor and his associates and everyone on this
planet, except our chosen group, will never have existed. Shall we begin?  
WHITAKER: I've been waiting for you. As you know, the temporal beam has
reached back through time and brought forward objects from the past. Now, by a
completely different application of the same basic principle, I am about to
reverse time. At least, in a limited field.  
(Whitaker switches on and nods to Butler, who throws a tea mug onto a red
board, where it smashes to pieces.)  
WHITAKER: I shall now activate the time field.  
(Whitaker pulls a different yellow lever and the eddy appears. The shattered
mug reforms and rises back into Butler's hand.)  
WHITAKER: There you are, Minister. For the space of a few seconds, I rolled
back time itself.

**[Spaceship]**

(Hiding behind a panel, Sarah watches Adam get himself a drink from a
dispenser. He leaves, she runs over to another door and opens it. Inside are
various control consoles and an illuminated panel on another door which says
Danger Depressurized. Sarah is about to press a button when some levers start
moving of their own accord. She goes to the next one, and presses numbered
buttons, but nothing happens.)

**[Spaceship 'reminder' room]**

(Mark is watching the film.)  
BUTLER [OC]: The rules of so-called civilised society are breaking down as
increased protest and disorder calls for stronger and more violent repression
from the authorities, which in turn leads to more political violence. All over
Europe  
(Sarah enters. Mark leaps up and tries to get past her.)  
SARAH: Look, Mark, you've got to listen to me. I've got something very
important to tell you. Please!

**[UNIT HQ - temporary]**

BENTON: There was nothing I could do, sir. He attacked me.  
FINCH: Were there no guards?  
BENTON: I'd sent them off to fix up a cell, sir.  
FINCH: What do you mean, he attacked you? There isn't a mark on you.  
BRIGADIER: The Doctor uses a rather unique form of unarmed combat, sir.  
FINCH: You'll be court martialled, Sergeant. Brigadier?  
BRIGADIER: Sir?  
FINCH: I'm instituting a full scale search for the Doctor at once. I shall
want the full cooperation of you and your men. They are to shoot on sight.
Meanwhile, put this man under arrest. Captain Yates.  
(Finch and Yates leave.)  
BRIGADIER: Well, don't just stand there, Benton. Go and put yourself under
arrest.  
BENTON: Sir?  
BRIGADIER: Where's the Doctor gone?  
BENTON: To that underground place, I think, sir.  
BRIGADIER: Then we've got to find him before General Finch does. Get the men
ready.  
BENTON: Right, sir.

**[Spaceship side room]**

(Sarah pushes lots of buttons. Nothing happens)  
SARAH: Now will you believe me?  
MARK: There must be some explanation.  
SARAH: Mark, where is this planet we're heading for?  
MARK: In another solar system close to Earth.  
SARAH: The nearest possible solar system to us is four light years away. With
the most advanced spaceships developed, it would take hundreds of years to
reach there.  
MARK: One of our members invented a new space drive.  
SARAH: Do you see that bruise? I got that just before I was kidnapped and
brought here. Now if I'd been here three months, it would have gone.  
MARK: You were in suspended animation.  
SARAH: Oh, Mark! I've only been here a matter of hours. All right. All right,
if we're in space, how did I get here?  
MARK: You must have been transferred from one of the other ships.  
SARAH: There aren't any other ships. All this is a fake! We're not on a
spaceship at all.  
MARK: Oh, that is ridiculous!  
SARAH: I'll prove it to you. I'm going out through that airlock!  
MARK: That opens directly out into space. You'll be killed.  
SARAH: No, I won't, because the whole set up is a fake. Now go out there and
watch.

**[Spaceship]**

(From the main area, Mark watches Sarah open the outer airlock door and step
through with a smile on her face. Adam enters.)  
ADAM: Mark? Ah, there you are. What's the matter? Are you all right?  
MARK: Yes, yes, yes, I'm fine, I'm fine.  
ADAM: Ah. How's our young friend?  
MARK: She's all right.  
ADAM: Ah. I thought I might have a chat with her. Is she still in the reminder
room?  
MARK: Yes, but I think we should leave her there a little bit longer. I think
that's what she needs.  
ADAM: You know, it might be a good idea for all of us to spend a little time
in the reminder room before we arrive.  
(Meanwhile, the Doctor is driving a Land Rover around Fuller & Co, Chiswick,
evading other UNIT vehicles.

**[Underground bunker]**

(Sarah can hear voices.)  
BUTLER [OC]: Well, Professor, that's the first time I've ever seen a Minister
lost for words.

**[Control room]**

(Sarah peers round the door.)  
BUTLER: Mmm?  
WHITAKER: We shall need the reactor running at full power.  
BUTLER: Oh, it is.  
WHITAKER: Check it again.  
BUTLER: The reactor is working perfectly.  
WHITAKER: The power levels are critical. I must be assured that they are
sufficient to trigger the time field.  
BUTLER: All right, I'll check it again.

**[Underground bunker]**

(Sarah hides.)  
WHITAKER [OC]: Thank you very much.  
(Butler comes out of the control room and walks away. Sarah starts to follow
him then discovers the lift. She presses the up button.)

**[Grover's office]**

(Grover is about to open the door to the filing room lift when his intercom
beeps.)  
GROVER: Yes?  
MAN [OC]: Your car's ready, sir.  
GROVER: Oh, thank you.  
(Sarah is in the filing room, rising upwards. Grover collects his coat and
leaves. The panel slides back from the door and Sarah carefully opens it then
enters the empty office. She looks into the outer office.)

**[Army Land Rover]**

(The Doctor is driving through a wooded area when he spots a helicopter
overhead. It reports back to a pursing army patrol.)  
PILOT [OC]: Tango one to patrol. Over.  
ARMY: Patrol. Over.  
PILOT [OC]: He's turned off. He's heading for the Common. Over.  
ARMY: Roger. Out.  
(The Doctor comes to a fork in the road, and reverses as he sees the army
heading towards him. He drives into the trees to avoid the helicopter.)  
PILOT [OC]: Tango one to patrol. Over.  
ARMY: Patrol. Over.  
PILOT [OC}: He's turned again. Heading into the trees. I've lost him. He's
somewhere among those trees. Over.  
ARMY: Patrol out.

**[Common]**

(The army pulls up alongside the Doctor's abandoned Land Rover and the
Corporal gets out to look around.)  
ARMY: Right, everybody out.  
(From a small rise, the Doctor watches the patrol leave their vehicle and the
Corporal sends his men off in different directions.)  
ARMY: You, down there. You, over there.  
(Now on his own, the Corporal moves off. The Doctor carefully ducks down
amongst the bracken and ferns to avoid the patrols. One of the soldiers
decides to stop for a cigarette break. The Doctor makes his way to the Army
Land Rover. As he gets in, the helicopter continues to search the area.)  
PILOT [OC]: Tango one to patrol. Any luck? Over.  
DOCTOR: (London accent) Hello Tango one. Patrol here. It's all right, we've
got him. Yeah, we're bringing him in now. Listen, inform all the other units,
will you? Over.  
PILOT [OC]: Roger, patrol. Congratulations. We'll inform HQ. Get them to call
off the search. Out.  
(The helicopter flies off and someone starts shooting at the Doctor. He drives
off as the Corporal comes running down the slope and gets into the Doctor's
original Land Rover, which won't start.)

**[UNIT HQ - temporary]**

SARAH: I tell you I have got a pass.  
BRYSON: Then I must see it, Miss. I've got strict instructions.  
SARAH: Never mind your instructions.  
  
BRYSON: I've got to check everybody's pass.  
SARAH: Look, where's the Brigadier?  
BRYSON: Well, he's out.  
SARAH: But where?  
BRYSON: I can't tell you that, Miss.  
SARAH: Please, you've got to tell me!  
BRYSON: Well, they're out on this big hunt, Miss, looking for the Doctor.  
SARAH: The Doctor?  
BRYSON: Well, they had him arrested but he escaped. Well, he made the
monsters.  
SARAH: Don't be ridiculous.  
BRYSON: Well, they caught him red-handed.  
SARAH: Well, where's Captain Yates or Sergeant Benton?  
BRYSON: All out on this man-hunt, Miss.  
(Sarah thinks, then starts writing a note.)  
SARAH: Look, I'm going to leave this note for the Brigadier. Now you see that
he gets it, hmm?  
BRYSON: Yes, Miss.  
(Sarah finishes writing.)  
SARAH: Oh, am I glad to see you.  
FINCH: Miss Smith.  
SARAH: What's all this about the Doctor?  
FINCH: Re-captured. Where is he now?  
BRYSON: I'm sorry, sir. Who, sir?  
FINCH: The Doctor. I heard a message over the R/T to say he'd been caught.
Wasn't at my HQ so I thought they must have brought him here.  
BRYSON: No, sir, he's not here, sir.  
SARAH: Look, the Doctor isn't behind all this, but I know who is. I know
everything!  
FINCH: Do you, now.  
SARAH: You  
FINCH: All right. Dismissed.  
BRYSON: Sir?  
FINCH: Get out!  
(Bryson leaves.)  
FINCH: Now, Miss Smith, what's all this about?  
SARAH: Well, you're never going to believe this. It's Grover, the Minister.
He's behind everything.  
FINCH: Oh, come now. That's impossible.  
SARAH: No, I promise you, it's the truth. They're operating from a hidden
control centre. It's underground and it's right beneath Grover's office. Well,
that's why he stayed in London.  
FINCH: He stayed because he's in charge of the emergency.  
SARAH: He's causing the emergency! You've got to stop him, put him under
arrest. We can raid that place with your men.  
FINCH: Oh, come now. I can't take action against a Minister of the Crown
simply on your word.  
SARAH: I can prove what I'm saying is true. Come to Grover's office with me.  
FINCH: Hmm. Well, I think your story needs investigating. Have you told
anyone?  
SARAH: There's nobody here to tell. I'd only just arrived when you turned up.  
FINCH: Have you any idea why the Minister should be doing all this?

**[Grover's office]**

FINCH: I don't understand. The place is absolutely deserted. Very bad
security. Now where's this special room?  
SARAH: Over there. Shouldn't we have brought some of your men here with us? I
mean, might be quite a few of them down there.  
FINCH: There's still no proof of your extraordinary story, Miss Smith. I must
check it myself first. Delicate business this, you know.

**[Filing room]**

FINCH: It's just a file room.  
SARAH: It's a lift. The controls are in here.  
(Sarah fiddles inside the top drawer of the cabinet that contained the alleged
bunker files.)  
FINCH: What's all this bumf?  
SARAH: Oh, just a lot of old ministry files. There.  
(The lift starts down. She turns to see Finch is pointing his pistol at her.)  
SARAH: Oh, boy. I really do choose my friends, don't I.  
(The lift arrives.)  
FINCH: I think you know the way.

**[Control room]**

FINCH: Returning your prisoner, sir.  
GROVER: How did you leave the ship?  
SARAH: There isn't any spaceship. Stop playing.  
GROVER: Did she tell anybody?  
FINCH: No, fortunately everyone was out of the way. I think the Doctor has
escaped again.  
WHITAKER: I did everything you asked me to incriminate him. All wasted.  
FINCH: You did very well.  
GROVER: Have you any idea where he is?  
FINCH: He's probably on his way here now. But he needn't worry us. The
countdown is too close.  
GROVER: It's time to go into the final phase. You, Whitaker, will produce a
last wave of apparition monsters all over London to drive out any remaining
people. (to Finch) You will order the complete withdrawal of all your troops,
including UNIT.  
FINCH: The Brigadier is bound to protest.  
GROVER: You have final authority. Overrule him.  
FINCH: Well, I'll see to it right away. What about the girl?  
GROVER: Leave her to me.  
FINCH: Well, don't lose her again.  
(Finch leaves.)  
GROVER: Now then, what are we to do with you?  
SARAH: Just don't put me back on your fake spaceship, that's all.  
GROVER: I don't think that'd be a good idea. You're rather a bad influence.  
SARAH: What you're doing to those people on there is cruel. They all believe
that they're going to a new world.  
GROVER: And so they are, but their new world is this one. This world of ours
swept clean and returned to its early innocence.  
SARAH: You're going to take them back to the past?  
GROVER: We're going to bring the past to them.  
SARAH: I don't understand.  
GROVER: By rolling back time, by taking the Earth back to an earlier, purer
age.  
SARAH: Oh, what about all the people on Earth now?  
GROVER: They'll vanish. They and their ancestors will never have been born.  
SARAH: That's horrible! It's worse than murder.  
GROVER: No, you don't understand. But I hope, Miss Smith, when you do
understand, you'll want to be with us. If you're ready, Whitaker?  
WHITAKER: Yes.  
(On the time target monitor, a triceratops appears on a roof across from
Westminster Abbey. Near Parliament, a brontosaurus grazes on a tree. A
stegosaurus is a couple of streets away from St Paul's, a T Rex in front of a
Georgian terrace. The Doctor encounters another brontosaurus by Smithfield
Market. He turns around and the time eddy dumps another T Rex almost on top of
him.)

__**Part Six**__

**[Smithfield Market]**

(The Doctor's Land Rover stalls and refuses to start again. He tries to get
into the market proper but the shutters are locked. Then the predator spots
the prey and the two giant lizards approach each other. T Rex grabs Bronto
behind the head and the Doctor quietly sneaks away. Once out of sight of the
fighting dinosaurs he runs, only to stop again as an Army Land Rover comes
round a corner towards him.)  
FINCH: Leave him to me.  
(Benton and the Brigadier drive up behind the Doctor.)  
BRIGADIER: My prisoner.  
FINCH: Get out of the way, Brigadier.  
BRIGADIER: I'm sorry, General, this man is a UNIT prisoner. I'm taking him
into custody.  
FINCH: Get out of my way!  
BRIGADIER: Benton?  
(Benton stands and aims his semi-automatic at the General.)  
FINCH: You realise this is mutiny?  
BRIGADIER: There's no question of mutiny, sir. I'm only doing my job.  
FINCH: You'll place this man under close arrest. I'm holding you responsible
for him.  
(Finch gestures his driver to carry on, and the Land Rover drives away.)  
BRIGADIER: Coming, Doctor?

**[Bunker store room]**

SARAH: Oh, you're not going to shut me in there?  
BUTLER: You won't be there long.  
SARAH: Where are you lot going?  
BUTLER: Much further than you'd ever believe.  
SARAH: You won't just leave me here?  
BUTLER: Don't worry, you're coming with us.  
(Butler locks her in. Well, at least this room has a light switch, wooden
boxes and a large coil of rope, together with a big ventilation grille on the
wall.)

**[UNIT HQ - temporary]**

BRIGADIER: Doctor, I can get away with holding you here, keeping you out of
General Finch's hands, but what you're suggesting is mutiny. What the blazes
are you doing?  
(Bryson is disconnecting the radio set.)  
BRYSON: Orders, sir. We're evacuating. All the others have gone.  
BRIGADIER: Whose orders?  
BRYSON: General Finch, sir. I thought you knew all about it.  
BRIGADIER: This is ridiculous. The whole of London crawling with monsters and
he decides. What about the spotter patrols?  
BRYSON: They've all gone, sir. Everyone's out of the area.  
BRIGADIER: Good grief!  
DOCTOR: Look, face up to it, Brigadier. General Finch is involved just like
Grover.  
BRIGADIER: Is everybody in this conspiracy?  
DOCTOR: Well, Captain Yates certainly is.  
BRIGADIER: Now that I can't believe.  
BENTON: Well, he's been pretty odd lately, sir, and he was very keen on
locking the Doctor up.  
BRIGADIER: He was merely obeying orders.  
DOCTOR: Hmm. There's a note here from Sarah. There you are. Yes, she says
she's got positive proof of Grover's involvement and the existence of the
underground base. Here, see for yourself.  
BRIGADIER: Where the blazes is she?  
DOCTOR: Er, Private? When was this note left?  
BRYSON: Very early this morning, sir. She went off with General Finch.  
DOCTOR: Thank you.  
BRIGADIER: Benton, I want a call to Geneva.  
BENTON: Right, sir.  
BRIGADIER: I'll get on to International UNIT HQ. They must put pressure on the
government.  
DOCTOR: There's no time for that.  
BRIGADIER: Well, can you suggest anything else we can do?  
DOCTOR: Yes. Attack that underground base now.  
BRYSON: Sir?  
BRIGADIER: Yeah?  
BRYSON: Excuse me, sir, but, er, are we evacuating or not?  
BRIGADIER: No.  
BRYSON: Oh, well, in in that case, sir, what should I do?  
BRIGADIER: Oh, go and make us all a cup of tea.  
(Bryson leaves, smiling.)  
BENTON: Yes? Yes, put him through now, please. Geneva on the line, sir. There,
sir.  
BRIGADIER: Thank you.  
YATES: Put it down, sir.  
(Yates has his pistol pointed at the Brigadier.)  
YATES: Over there, Sergeant.  
Benton backs away to join the Brigadier and Doctor.)  
YATES: (into radio.) Would you cancel that call, please? We won't be needing
it now.  
BRIGADIER: And what do you think you're doing, Captain Yates?  
YATES: I'm really sorry, sir.  
(Sarah finally gets the grille off the wall and crawls into the shaft.)  
DOCTOR: Just what are they going to do, Mike?  
YATES: They're going to roll back time. The world used to be a cleaner,
simpler place. It's all become too complicated and corrupt.  
DOCTOR: Roll back time, I see. Can Whitaker really do that?  
YATES: I believe so. All the preliminary experiments have been successful.  
DOCTOR: Do you realise what'll happen if they succeed?  
YATES: We shall find ourselves in the golden age.  
DOCTOR: There never was a golden age, Mike. It's all an illusion.  
YATES: Not this time. We're going to make it come true.  
BRIGADIER: Really. How?  
DOCTOR: Whitaker's machine creates a protective field, and anyone within that
field will be unaffected. Anybody outside it will just cease to exist.  
YATES: Quite right, Doctor.  
BRIGADIER: Are we inside this protective field?  
YATES: Perhaps, perhaps not. We're on the very edge of the zone here, but it
doesn't matter.  
BENTON: You mean it doesn't matter to you not existing?  
YATES: I'm not important. The others'll get there.  
DOCTOR: Now listen to me, Mike, I  
(Yates turns his weapon on the Doctor.)  
DOCTOR: Look, I understand your ideals. In many ways I sympathise with them.
But this is not the way to go about it, you know? You've got no right to take
away the existence of generations of people.  
YATES: There's no alternative.  
DOCTOR: Yes, there is. Take the world that you've got and try and make
something of it. It's not too late.  
BRYSON: Oh, I didn't know you were back, Captain Yates, sir.  
(Yates turns, Bryson drops the tea tray and Benson kicks Yates' gun out of his
hand then grabs him around the neck.)

**[Spaceship]**

ADAM: Welcome. Welcome to the people. We've revived you because it's almost
time for our landing on New Earth.  
(Ruth enters.)  
RUTH: Adam? That girl's gone. She's not in the reminder room.  
ADAM: Well, she can't have gone far.  
(Sarah sneaks in through the airlock.)  
RUTH: But we must find her.  
(Mark spots Sarah and shakes his head. Sarah goes into the small room.)  
ADAM: Oh, very well, my dear, I'll help you, but all our friends are waking
up. Aren't you going to say welcome to them?  
RUTH: Later.  
ADAM: Oh, excuse me.  
MARK: I'll be back in a minute.

**[Spaceship side room]**

MARK: What did you find? Where are we?  
SARAH: Somewhere under central London. The whole ship is a fake.  
MARK: Why did they cheat us?  
SARAH: Well, it's too complicated to explain now, but it's something to do
with altering the course of time.  
MARK: Those poor people. What can we do?  
SARAH: Tell them the truth.

**[UNIT HQ - temporary]**

(Benson is packing explosives into a rucksack while Bryson is on the radio.)  
BRYSON: Come in mobile patrols. All mobile patrols, come in please. Over.  
(Static.)  
BENTON: There we are, Doctor. Blow your way into the Bank of England with that
lot.  
DOCTOR: Thank you, Sergeant.  
BRYSON: Trap two.  
BRIGADIER: I still think we should wait for reinforcements.  
DOCTOR: We can't wait.  
BRYSON: Please acknowledge. Over.  
DOCTOR: That project's going to be activated any moment now and when that
happens, your reinforcements will vanish. And so will you.  
(Benson hands the Doctor a long coil of nylon rope.)  
BRYSON: Trap two calling all mobile patrols.  
BRIGADIER: Oh, very well. Benton, you stay here.  
BRYSON: Please acknowledge. Please acknowledge.  
BRIGADIER: Try and collect those mobile patrols. As soon as you've assembled
any kind of force, rendezvous with the Doctor and myself at the tube station.  
BENTON: Right, sir.  
BRIGADIER: Keep trying, Bryson.  
BENTON: Er, good luck, Doctor!  
DOCTOR: Thank you.

**[Spaceship]**

(Sarah is talking to the newly revived people.)  
SARAH: Oh, can't you understand? It's all a trick. You're not on a spaceship.
You're not going to another planet.  
ROBINSON: That can't be true! They promised us. We're going to a new world! I
went into everything very carefully. I sold my house.  
(Ruth and Adam enter.)  
MARK: She's telling us the truth!  
ADAM: It's all right, Ruth, she's here.  
MARK: Adam, we've been tricked!  
RUTH: How did you get out of the reminder room? Where have you been?  
SARAH: Out of the ship.  
RUTH: The girl's mad.  
ROBINSON: Look, I don't understand all this.  
SARAH: Do you know what's on the other side of that airlock? A flight of
steps.  
RUTH: Adam, we must lock her up.  
MARK: I saw her open the airlock.  
RUTH: And I can see that she's very persuasive.  
MARK: Adam, she's telling us the truth.  
RUTH: Now listen to me, all of you. This poor girl is unbalanced. She should
never have been selected. Already she's contaminated one of us.  
MARK: I'm going out through that airlock so you can see.  
RUTH: Stop him! We'll all be killed!  
(Robinson grabs Mark and they struggle.)  
ADAM: Mark! We can't have fighting.  
RUTH: You see? They're a danger to themselves and to all of us.  
SARAH: There is no danger.  
RUTH: Oh no you don't!  
SARAH: Look, the people who organised all this, they've got a machine that's
going to affect time itself. It's got nothing to do with space travel.  
RUTH: We must lock her up. Come on.  
SARAH: No, you've got to help me stop them, otherwise the whole world'll be in
danger! Millions of people are going to be wiped out!  
(Ruth and another woman drag Sarah away. Robinson pulls Mark along.)  
MARK: Adam, that's the truth! Robinson, will you listen?

**[Spaceship side room]**

(Adam flicks a switch on a console.)  
ADAM: Hello? Hello, can anyone hear me?  
BUTLER [OC]: This is Spaceship One. We are receiving you.  
ADAM: Thank God. I'd like to speak to Charles Grover, please. I've got to
speak to Charles Grover. Something very disturbing has happened.

**[Road]**

(A T Rex roars nearby, and a brontosaurus is standing across the road as the
Doctor drives up.)  
DOCTOR: Hang on to your hat, Brigadier.  
(They drive between the legs of the brontosaurus.)

**[Control room]**

BUTLER: I don't know how she got away but somehow she's got back into that
spaceship and she's stirring them all up.  
GROVER: Can't you reassure them?  
BUTLER: It's no good, I tried. Our friend Adam insists on talking to you.  
GROVER: There's not much time.  
BUTLER: Well, you'd better talk to them. Adam sounded in quite a state.  
GROVER: In that case, I'd better dress for the occasion.

**[Outside Moorgate station]**

(A stegosaurus is blocking the entrance to the Met and Circle lines. The
Doctor and Brigadier get out of the Land Rover, and the Brigadier throws a
grenade at it. The close bang makes the creature back slowly away.)

**[Spaceship]**

(More people have been woken. Everyone is watching the flashing Danger
Depressurized sign on the airlock as thud is heard.)  
RUTH: You had no right to call him. We could have dealt with this ourselves.  
ADAM: I think he's got a lot to answer for.  
ROBINSON: How will he reach us from the other ship?  
RUTH: There's a shuttle. It's just locked on to us.  
(A figure in spacesuit and helmet comes in through the outer airlock door.)  
ROBINSON: What's he doing now?  
ADAM: Equalising the air pressure.  
(The sign goes out and the figure enters via side room.)  
GROVER: Well, Adam, what's the problem?

**[Underground station]**

BRIGADIER: Well, I never thought I'd find myself blowing up a tube station. If
you're wrong, Doctor, I'm going to have a job explaining this to London
Transport.  
DOCTOR: Well, don't worry, Brigadier, I'm never wrong. If we don't get down
there, there won't be a London Transport to explain to.

**[Spaceship 'reminder' room]**

(Sarah and Mark have their hands bound behind them.)  
GROVER: You really are a terrible problem to me, Miss Smith.  
MARK: You cheated us!  
GROVER: I had to.  
MARK: Why? Why couldn't you tell us the truth?  
SARAH: He didn't dare tell you. Don't you understand, Mark? Millions of people
will be wiped out. That's the truth, isn't it?  
GROVER: Put that way, yes, I'm afraid it is.

**[Spaceship]**

(Outside the room, Adam is listening.)  
GROVER [OC]: Yet, in a sense, these people will come to no harm at all because
they will never have been born. I had to tell a story that would be acceptable
to people like Adam. The sort of people I wanted to recruit.

**[Spaceship 'reminder' room]**

SARAH: Yes. Kind, decent people who just might object to the destruction of
generations of human beings!  
GROVER: I'm only deceiving them about the means, not the ends. They will have
their new world, but it will be this world returned to an earlier purer age.  
MARK: The end can never justify the means. What you're doing is criminal.  
GROVER: Mark, for the sake of the others, can't you accept the situation?  
MARK: No, never.  
SARAH: We'll go on telling them the truth every chance we get.  
GROVER: In that case, I must see that you don't get the chance. Once this
project has been completed, I can only hope that you will adjust to life in
the new world. I really am very sorry about all this. I can only hope that in
the future we shall be friends.

**[Underground station]**

(The Doctor is attaching wires to the explosives when they hear a roar from
the far end of the platform.)  
BRIGADIER: We've got company.  
DOCTOR: Good grief. It's a triceratops. Look, Brigadier, try and keep it
occupied while I'm finishing this off, will you? Don't worry, they're none too
bright.  
BRIGADIER: Right.  
(The Brigadier takes a flare from his own rucksack, lights it and walks
towards the triceratops.)  
BRIGADIER: All right, Doctor. I think I can cope with it.

**[Spaceship 'reminder' room]**

(Adam enters.)  
MARK: Adam, you've got to help us.  
ADAM: I know. I overheard. I had to wait until Ruth was out of the way.  
(Adam cuts them free.)  
ADAM: Now, what are we going to do?  
SARAH: Get to the flight deck and open that airlock!

**[Underground station]**

BRIGADIER: Are you ready, Doctor? This is the last flare.  
DOCTOR: Yes. Yes, nearly ready. Come on.  
(The Doctor trails the wires away from the cleaner's cupboard and back to the
stairs. The Brigadier backs away from the confused dinosaur and joins him. The
Doctor pushes the detonator and KaBOOM!)  
DOCTOR: Right, let's take a look.  
(The cupboard floor has been blown away.)  
DOCTOR: Ah, there it is. Right, I'm going down there.  
BRIGADIER: I'll come with you.  
DOCTOR: No, I'd rather go on my own. It's less conspicuous. You go and get
those reinforcements, will you?  
BRIGADIER: Right.

**[Outside the Underground station]**

(The Brigadier uses the radio in the Land Rover.)  
BRIGADIER: Greyhound one to Trap Two. Over.

**[UNIT HQ - temporary]**

BENTON: Trap Two. Sergeant Benton here, sir.

**[Underground station]**

BRIGADIER: Now look, we've broken through and the Doctor's inside. What about
those reinforcements?

**[UNIT HQ - temporary]**

BENTON: Just one mobile patrol, sir. That's all I could raise.  
BRIGADIER [OC]: Better than nothing. Bring them along.  
BENTON: Yes, sir.  
BRIGADIER [OC]: Quick as you can, Benton, out.  
(Finch is covering Benton with his pistol.)  
BENTON: Look, sir, I've got to send those reinforcements. The Brigadier's in
trouble.  
FINCH: You'll do as you're told, Sergeant.  
BENTON: Sir, I've got to send them.  
FINCH: I'm warning you, Sergeant.  
BENTON: Very good, sir.  
(Benton turns back to the radio then swings round quickly grabbing General's
gun hand. They tussle, and Finch is pushed backwards over a table.)  
FINCH: You'll be court martialled for this, Sergeant!  
BENTON: Yes, sir.  
(Benton thumps the General's gun hand against the table.)  
BENTON: Very sorry, sir!

**[Spaceship]**

ADAM: I think you should at least listen, Ruth.  
ROBINSON: That does sound reasonable, to listen.  
RUTH: Very well. What is it you want me to listen to?  
SARAH: I think it's best if you just watch.  
RUTH: What's she going to do?  
MARK: Open the airlock.  
RUTH: But she'll kill herself! She'll kill us all!  
ADAM: If she's wrong, she's the only one that will suffer.  
(Sarah is inside the airlock. She opens the outer door and nothing happens.
Smiling, she returns through the inner door.)  
MARK: You see?  
(The other people mutter in the background.)  
SARAH: The people who tricked you are out there. Now is your chance to demand
an explanation.  
(Ruth leads everyone out. Meanwhile, the Doctor is in the bunker. He hides as
Butler approaches, then grabs him and uses his pressure points to knock him
out.)

**[Control room]**

WHITAKER: Everything's ready.  
GROVER: General Finch should be here.  
WHITAKER: I hope you don't propose to wait. The timing is crucial.  
GROVER: He must be somewhere in the area. So long as he's in the protective
field, he'll be all right.  
ADAM: Stop! We shall have no part in this.  
(The people from the spaceship enter. Mark grabs Whitaker before he can pull a
lever.)  
RUTH: You've cheated us.  
GROVER: My friends, listen to me. I have not cheated you. Let Professor
Whitaker pull that lever and you shall have the golden age that I promised
you.  
ADAM: You're going to destroy all the civilisations of man. Leaving Earth for
another planet, that was one thing, but this is evil!  
GROVER: Civilisation has already destroyed man. It's time to make a fresh
start. If we take the Earth back in time, we can guide man onto a better path.  
(The Doctor enters.)  
SARAH: Oh, Doctor!  
GROVER: Congratulations, Doctor. You're just in time to be present at the most
important moment in the world's history.  
DOCTOR: On the contrary, I'm just in time to prevent an atrocity.  
(The Brigadier and Benton enter with a couple of soldiers.)  
BRIGADIER: Don't move, any of you! Benton.  
(Whitaker throws off Mark and pulls a lever. A fierce time eddy fills the
room, freezing everyone. Only the Doctor is unaffected, who pushes against the
effect to put the lever back where it was. Then the Doctor goes to another
panel and flicks some switches. Grover dives for the lever again.)  
WHITAKER: No! He's reversed the polarity!  
(Whitaker and Grover fight over the lever.)  
DOCTOR: Keep back!  
(Grover pulls the lever down again, and he and Whitaker and the console
disappear.)  
SARAH: Well, where've they gone?  
DOCTOR: Back to their golden age. And I hope they like it.

**[UNIT HQ - temporary]**

BRIGADIER: I still don't understand, Doctor. When Whitaker first pulled that
switch, was time reversed or wasn't it?  
DOCTOR: It was for the world outside the forcefield. Your time was just frozen
for a few seconds.  
SARAH: But what about you? Oh no, don't tell me. You're a Time Lord.  
DOCTOR: Quite!  
SARAH: Poor Grover.  
BRIGADIER: The man was mad.  
DOCTOR: Yes, well, of course he was mad. But at least he realised the dangers
this planet of yours is in, Brigadier. The danger of it becoming one vast
garbage dump inhabited only by rats.  
BRIGADIER: It'll never happen, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: It's not the the oil and the filth and the poisonous chemicals that
are the real cause of pollution, Brigadier. It's simply greed.  
BRIGADIER: Hmm. Well, I've got work to do, writing my deposition for General
Finch's court martial.  
BENTON: Excuse me, sir? What about Captain Yates?  
BRIGADIER: Extended sick leave and a chance to resign quietly. Best I could
do.  
DOCTOR: Poor Mike.  
BRIGADIER: Come on, Benton.  
BENTON: Still I'll say one thing. Not many Sergeants get the chance to punch a
General on the nose.  
BRIGADIER: Just don't make a habit of it, Benton.  
(The Brigadier and Benton leave.)  
DOCTOR: Well, there you are, Sarah. I told you I'd get you home safely, didn't
I.  
SARAH: Oh, of all the cheek.  
DOCTOR: Well, it's not my fault if people get up to no good while we were
away.  
SARAH: Alien monsters, robber barons, then dinosaurs. It'll be a long time
before I get in that Tardis again.  
DOCTOR: Oh. It's a pity, that.  
SARAH: Why?  
DOCTOR: Well, er, I was rather thinking of making a trip to Florana.  
SARAH: Where?  
DOCTOR: Florana. Probably one of the most beautiful planets in the universe.  
SARAH: Well, count me out.  
DOCTOR: It's always carpeted with perfumed flowers.  
SARAH: I'm not listening.  
DOCTOR: And its seas are as warm milk and the sands as soft as swan's down.  
SARAH: No, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: The streams flow with water that are clearer than the clearest
crystal.  
SARAH: No.  
(Laughing, Sarah puts her hands over her ears.)  
  
---  
  
<Back to the episode listing

Doctor Who and related marks are trademarks of BBC . Copyright  1963,
Present. The web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment
purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

