**The Daleks**  

Original Airdate: 21 Dec, 1963  

**__Episode One - The Dead Planet__**

**[Tardis]**

DOCTOR: Well, I suggest before we go outside and explore, let us clean
ourselves up.  
SUSAN: Oh, yes.  
DOCTOR: Now what does the radiation read, Susan?  
SUSAN: It's reading normal, Grandfather.  
(But after they walk away, the needle goes up into the Danger Zone)

**[Forest]**

BARBARA: There's been a forest fire. Everything's sort of white and ashen.  
IAN: Funny mist.  
DOCTOR: The heat must have been indescribable. Look at this soil here. Look at
it. It's all turn to sand and ashes. Extraordinary. How can shrubs or trees
grow in soil like that, hmm?  
IAN: Something else that's strange. There's quite a breeze blowing.  
SUSAN: Well?  
IAN: Well, look at the branches and things.  
SUSAN: They don't seem to be moving.  
BARBARA: They're not. They're absolutely still.  
(Ian touches a twig, and it breaks easily)  
IAN: Huh. Like stone, look. Very brittle stone. It crumbles when you touch it.
Look.  
DOCTOR: It's petrified. How fascinating, a petrified jungle. Hm.
Extraordinary. Yes, I must really investigate that. Couldn't have been heat,
then, and age would merely decay.  
SUSAN: What could have caused it, Grandfather?  
DOCTOR: I don't know, I don't know, but I intend to find out.  
SUSAN: Well I'm coming too.  
(The Doctor and Susan go exploring)  
BARBARA: Ian, where are we?  
IAN: I don't know.  
BARBARA: Well why doesn't he take us back?  
IAN: I'm not sure that he can.  
BARBARA: What, ever?  
IAN: I hate it as much as you. I'm just as afraid. But what can we do?  
BARBARA: Well, we could at least stay near the ship.  
IAN: The ship's no good without him. We'd better keep an eye on him. He seems
to have a knack of getting himself into trouble.  
BARBARA: You think there's any danger?  
IAN: Not necessarily.  
BARBARA: But don't be too complacent. No, you're right, I suppose. I just wish  
IAN: We'll be all right.  
BARBARA: Yes. Well, I suppose we'd better make sure he doesn't fall down and
break a leg. Don't you ever think he deserves something to happen to him?  
IAN: Yes.  
(Further on, Susan has made a discovery)  
SUSAN: Oh Grandfather, look! It's a flower. A perfect flower. Well, it's even
kept some of it's colour.  
DOCTOR: Yes, very pretty, very pretty. Hm.  
SUSAN: Hey, look. Look what I've found.  
IAN: Oh, that's beautiful.  
SUSAN: Isn't it? I'm going to try and pick it and keep it all in one piece.  
IAN: Oh, be careful. It'll be very fragile. There we are.  
SUSAN: Beautiful. When I get it back to the ship I'm  
BARBARA: Ian!  
SUSAN: going to put it into a glass and  
BARBARA: Ian!  
IAN: Coming, coming.  
(And he puts the flower in Susan's hands, and it breaks)  
IAN: What is it? What's the matter?  
(Barbara points at a lizard)  
BARBARA: No!  
IAN: It's all right. Like everything else in this place, solid stone.  
BARBARA: It's hideous.  
IAN: Yes, it is. It's also significant. Nothing on Earth could look like this.  
BARBARA: It looks like some sculptor's nightmare.  
DOCTOR: Yes, it's certainly alien to anything on your planet. But you're wrong
about one thing, Chesterfield. This isn't like everything else. The animal is
solidified, certainly, but it's not crumbly stone. It's metal. Yes, it always
was.  
IAN: What, even when it was alive? But that's impossible.  
DOCTOR: Why? Can't you imagine an animal unless it's flesh, blood and bone,
hmm? No, I tell you this is an entirely different formation. I should say
originally it was some pliable metal held together by a magnetic field, or an
inner magnetic field, rather, and it may have had the ability to attract it's
victims towards it, if they were metal too.  
BARBARA: We're not on Earth, then.  
DOCTOR: No, certainly not.  
IAN: Are you sure?  
DOCTOR: Oh, certain. And you needn't look at me like that, young man. We
started this journey far too hurriedly to make any calculations. You know that
as well as I do. However, we're alive.  
SUSAN: Hey, Grandfather, look. The jungle ends over there.  
IAN: Try not to be too upset.  
BARBARA: I counted so much on just going back to things I recognise and trust.
But here there's nothing to rely on. Nothing.  
IAN: Well, there's me. Barbara, all I ask you to do is believe, really
believe, we'll go back. We will, you know.  
BARBARA: I wish I was more like you. I'm afraid I'm a very unwilling
adventurer.  
IAN: I'm not exactly reveling in it myself.  
SUSAN: Grandfather's talking about fixing our position by the stars.  
IAN: Good. Where is he?  
SUSAN: Just over there.  
BARBARA: Susan. Don't you have anything in the ship that records the journeys?  
SUSAN: Oh, yes. There's a meter fixed to a great big bank of computers. If you
feed it with the right sort of information, it can take over the controls of
the ship and deliver you to any place you want to go.  
BARBARA: Then why don't we know where we are?  
SUSAN: Well, it's a question of the right information, you see. I don't say
that Grandfather doesn't know how to work the ship, but he's so forgetful, and
then he will go off and. Well, he likes to work on his own.  
BARBARA: So I've noticed.  
SUSAN: Anyway, he's only got to do some computations back in the ship and we
can move on.  
BARBARA: Well, it can't be too soon for me.  
DOCTOR: Well now, are we ready?  
BARBARA: Oh, Doctor, have you worked out yet how all this happened?  
DOCTOR: No, not really, not really. Whatever it was destroyed everything that
was living, but the planet is dead, totally dead.  
IAN: Barbara, Doctor. Over here.  
DOCTOR: What is it, Chesterton? We really must get back to  
(From the edge of the petrified jungle they can see across a plain to a city)  
DOCTOR: Most fascinating.  
BARBARA: A city, a huge city.  
(The Doctor puts on a pair of binocular glasses)  
IAN: Well, Doctor? Can you see anything? Any sign of life?  
DOCTOR: No, no, no sign of life. No, just buildings. Magnificent buildings, I  
SUSAN: Oh, let me have a look. It's fabulous. Here, you have a look.  
(Barbara takes her turn)  
IAN: What do you think, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: I don't know, I don't know. Whatever it was destroyed the vegetation
here certainly hasn't damaged the city. But there's no sign of life. No
movement, no light, no. No, I shall know more about it when I've been down
there.  
BARBARA: Down there? Oh, no. We're going back to the ship.  
DOCTOR: Now, don't be ridiculous. That city down there is a magnificent
subject for study, and I don't intend to leave here until I've thoroughly
investigated it.  
IAN: Well it's too late to talk about it now. It's getting dark. We'll discuss
it when we get back to the ship.  
SUSAN: Yes. Whatever you decide, it's too late to get down there now.  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, yes, all right then. But I assure you I'm determined to
study that place.  
IAN: You can do what you like, as long as you don't endanger the rest of us.  
DOCTOR: Very well then. I shall look at it myself, alone.  
IAN: You're the only one who can operate the ship. I'm afraid I can't let you
do that, Doctor. Your glasses.  
(Walking back through the jungle)  
IAN: I think this is the way we came.  
(Susan stops to pick another flower, then gets frightened)  
SUSAN: Who's there?  
(Someone or something touches her shoulder. She screams and Ian goes back to
find her)  
IAN: All right, Susan, it's all right. You're safe now.

**[Tardis]**

BARBARA: Did Susan tell you what frightened her?  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes. She's convinced that someone touched her, and I tried to
make her see it wasn't possible but I'm afraid she wouldn't listen to me. I
wonder, would you have a talk with her?  
BARBARA: Yes, of course I will.  
DOCTOR: Yes, you know, sometimes I find the gulf between Susan's age and mine
makes difficult understanding between us.  
BARBARA: I'll see what I can do.  
DOCTOR: Oh, would you? Thank you, thank you very much. I'd be grateful.  
(Susan is sitting at a table)  
BARBARA: Hello.  
SUSAN: Hello.  
BARBARA: What are you doing?  
SUSAN: Just drawing.  
BARBARA: Well, can I see?  
SUSAN: It's the flower I saw in the jungle.  
BARBARA: What happened out there?  
SUSAN: Nothing.  
BARBARA: Well Ian said you were terrified. Well, something must have
frightened you.  
SUSAN: It's not that so much. It's just that I'm, I'm fed up no one believes
me.  
BARBARA: Believes what?  
SUSAN: Oh, I don't know.  
BARBARA: That there was someone out there and they touched you on the
shoulder?  
SUSAN: There was someone there.  
BARBARA: But you didn't see who it was?  
SUSAN: No. It was like that. A light touch on the shoulder. I couldn't have
been mistaken.  
BARBARA: Well, I believe you.  
SUSAN: But Grandfather says that it's impossible for anyone to live out there.  
BARBARA: Oh, Susan, it isn't that he doesn't believe you. It's just that he
finds it difficult to go against his scientific facts.  
SUSAN: I know.  
BARBARA: Oh, look. Why don't you just try and forget it for the moment?  
SUSAN: For the moment.  
(By a bank of computers in the wall, the Doctor is noting the readings on the
screens and dials)  
IAN: What's this one for? I don't know how you make sense of any of this.  
DOCTOR: You're quite right, quite right.  
IAN: Can you find where we are? Well, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Hmm? Oh.  
IAN: I was wondering if perhaps you  
DOCTOR: My dear boy, these eternal questions of yours. Do I know where we are,
I suppose?  
IAN: Now listen, Doctor, I don't want to argue with you. We're fellow
travellers whether we like it or not. But for heaven's sake try and see it
from our point of view. You've uprooted us violently from our own lives. You  
DOCTOR: You pushed your way into the ship, young man.  
IAN: All right, all right, I admit it. A small part of the blame is ours.  
DOCTOR: Oh, small?  
IAN: But naturally we're anxious. What are we going to do? Can we live here?
What do we eat? There are millions of questions.  
DOCTOR: A very good idea. I'm hungry.  
(Susan it putting drops into a glass of water. Barbara is holding her head)  
DOCTOR: Oh, what's the matter?  
BARBARA: Oh, I've suddenly got this terrible headache.  
DOCTOR: Oh, dear, dear, how irksome for you. Oh, this stuff is very good. This
should cure it. Now, not too much, dear, not too much.  
SUSAN: No. Oh, Grandfather. I'm sorry I was so silly just now. Here, try this.  
BARBARA: Thank you. Oh, it's very nice.  
IAN: Let's hope it does you some good.  
(The Doctor is nibbling at something from a machine nearby)  
DOCTOR: Oh, did you want something to eat? What would you like?  
BARBARA: I'd like some bacon and eggs.  
IAN: All right, bacon and eggs.  
DOCTOR: Bacon and eggs.  
IAN: But  
SUSAN: This is fully automatic.  
DOCTOR: Yes, certainly, certainly. J62.  
SUSAN: (turning dials) J62.  
DOCTOR: L6.  
SUSAN: L6.  
IAN: I hope mine doesn't taste of engine grease.  
DOCTOR: Now, now, now, don't be ridiculous.  
BARBARA: Shall I get plates and things?  
SUSAN: No, there's no need to.  
(The Doctor takes two blocks out of the dispensing slot)  
SUSAN: Eggs and bacon.  
DOCTOR: Bacon and eggs.  
IAN: What, this?  
SUSAN: Go on, try it.  
(They unwrap the blocks and take a small bite)  
DOCTOR: Well?  
IAN: Mm. Not bad. What do you think, Barbara?  
BARBARA: I think it's delicious.  
IAN: My bacon's a bit salty.  
DOCTOR: It shouldn't be. It's English.  
IAN: No, seriously, Doctor, this is remarkable. I mean, one bite and I taste
the bacon, another and I taste the egg. How do you do it?  
DOCTOR: Food has component parts, dear boy. Flavours are rather like primary
colours, you know, you blend two to achieve a third, a fourth, etc, etc.  
IAN: Well, I think it's wonderful.  
SUSAN: How's your headache now?  
BARBARA: Oh, it's much better. I don't usually get them at all.  
DOCTOR: Susan, would you like something to eat?  
SUSAN: No thanks, I'm not hungry.  
DOCTOR: Oh, child, that's unusual. I do hope your affects outside the ship
hasn't affected you too much.  
SUSAN: No. I think I'll go to bed now, anyway.  
DOCTOR: Right.  
SUSAN: Do you want to know where you can sleep, Miss Wright?  
BARBARA: Oh, yes.  
(They hear a tapping sound)  
IAN: What's that?  
DOCTOR: The scanner.  
SUSAN: There was somebody there.  
(But the scanner just shows the trees)  
IAN: Nothing. Not a thing.  
SUSAN: But something must have made that noise.  
BARBARA: Look, I've had enough of this. Please, can't we get out of here?  
DOCTOR: Ah, but the city. I must see the city.  
BARBARA: But why?  
DOCTOR: I will not be questioned. Uninvited passengers. I didn't invite them
to the ship. I shall do what I want to do.  
IAN: Why endanger the rest of us by staying here?  
SUSAN: Grandfather, please. Please.  
(So the Doctor sets the Tardis going, and ducks under the console to remove
something)  
BARBARA: Stone trees are all very well, but the next forest I walk through I
want them all to be made of wood.  
(The Tardis starts shaking)  
SUSAN: What's the matter?  
DOCTOR: I don't know. The power take-up was rising normally and  
IAN: What's wrong?  
DOCTOR: Oh don't distract me, please.  
SUSAN: Shall I trace it on the fault locator, Grandfather?  
DOCTOR: Yes, I think you'd better, child.  
SUSAN: (checking a printout) K7.  
DOCTOR: K7? Ah, yes, of course, the fluid link. Yes, yes, yes. Yes.  
(Goes under the console and comes up with the part he took off earlier)  
DOCTOR: Yes, there we are, you see. The end of it's unscrewed itself and the
fluid has run out.  
IAN: Have you got a spare?  
DOCTOR: Oh, no, no need for that. This is easily repaired. All we have to do
is refill it.  
IAN: What liquid do you need?  
DOCTOR: Mercury.  
IAN: Mercury. Can I get it for you?  
DOCTOR: No, I'm afraid you can't. We haven't any at all.  
IAN: What?  
DOCTOR: No.  
IAN: Don't you carry a supply?  
DOCTOR: No, it hasn't been necessary. This hasn't happened before.  
IAN: But you must have some somewhere, surely.  
DOCTOR: No, no. We shall have to get some from outside.  
BARBARA: But where? There isn't anything outside because  
IAN: Yes. There's the city.  
DOCTOR: Yes, the city, of course. Of course we're bound to get some mercury
there. Yes, we're bound to. Well, I mean, what else can we do, hmm?  
IAN: It seems we have no alternative. We have to go to the city.  
DOCTOR: Yes, indeed. At first light, then?  
(Next day)  
IAN: Well, it's light enough and there doesn't seem to be anything out there.
We might as well get started. Oh, and Doctor. Remember we're going to this
city to find mercury, and once we've found it we're coming straight back here.
Is that clear?  
DOCTOR: Oh, quite so, quite so.

**[Forest]**

IAN: Well, shall I lead?  
DOCTOR: Yes, by all means.  
IAN: Look.  
(There's a small curved metal object on the ground)  
BARBARA: Don't touch it, it might go off.  
SUSAN: Be careful.  
DOCTOR: What is it, Chesterton?  
IAN: I don't know. Stand back, all of you.  
(He prods it with a long stick, then taps it. It sounds hollow)  
IAN: I think it's all right. A metal box. It's a box of glass phials. Look.  
DOCTOR: Let me see.  
SUSAN: Then there was somebody here last night. They must have dropped them. I
knew I was right.  
IAN: Yes. Sorry, Susan.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I'd like to run a few tests on those. Susan, would you take these
into the ship, please?  
SUSAN: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Thank you. Oh, and by the way, did you remember the food supplies?  
SUSAN: Yes. A day's supply for four. That's enough, isn't it?  
DOCTOR: Yes, ample, ample.  
IAN: I trust we won't be more than a couple of hours. You ready, Susan?  
SUSAN: Yes.  
IAN: Come on, then. Off we go.

**[City]**

(A very metallic, angular place)  
DOCTOR: Do you mind if I sit down for a minute? I feel a bit exhausted.  
IAN: You all right?  
DOCTOR: Yes, I'm just a bit tired. It was a long journey and my legs are
rather weak.  
BARBARA: Why don't you rest here? Ian and I will look around and see if we can  
DOCTOR: No, no, no, no, I want to look around too. I shall be all right, thank
you.  
IAN: I must say, I don't feel too good myself. Look, why don't we get this
over with quickly. Look for instruments, gauges, anything like that. Ideally
what we want is a laboratory.  
(A door opens)  
BARBARA: Ian, look.  
IAN: Why don't we separate and go different ways and meet back here in say,
ten minutes. All right?  
BARBARA: Fine. I'll go this way. (through the door)  
DOCTOR: Would you lend me your arm, would you, Susan? Thank you.  
(Ian finds the sensor to open another door - it's the round things by the side
of them)  
(On her travels, Barbara has to duck in the odd-shaped corridor, and she is
watched by a remote camera)  
SUSAN: Let's try this one. (the door opens for her) There's no light.  
(Barbara gets shut in by bulkheads closing behind her, but she only notices
when she tries to retrace her steps)  
IAN: Ah, there you are. Any luck?  
SUSAN: No. How about you?  
IAN: No, no luck. Barbara should be here by now. Barbara! Barbara! We'll give
her a couple of minutes more, and then if she's not back we'll have to go and
look for her.  
(Barbara is finally trapped and disappears)  
IAN: We've waited long enough for her. We must go and find her.  
(In another level of the city, Barbara leaves the elevator, and is confronted
by a vicious looking sink-plunger being waved by something. She screams)

__**Episode Two - The Survivors**__

**[City]**

(Ian, Susan and the Doctor have gone through the same door as Barbara did
earlier)  
IAN: Barbara? Barbara? Barbara?  
(Susan opens another door. It's dark inside)  
SUSAN: Miss Wright?  
(Ian tries another)  
IAN: Barbara?  
SUSAN: Hey, there's a corridor over here.  
IAN: We might as well see where it goes to. Come on.  
DOCTOR: Wait.  
IAN: What's the matter?  
DOCTOR: Listen.  
SUSAN: I can hear a ticking noise.  
DOCTOR: Quiet, child. Now listen.  
IAN: Yes. Over here somewhere.  
DOCTOR: It's stopped now.  
SUSAN: Hey, there it is again.  
IAN: It's coming from in here.

**[Room]**

IAN Ah, this is more hopeful. We ought to find some mercury here.  
DOCTOR: Measuring equipment. But measuring what? Look here. Look at this drum.
The ink's still quite wet.  
IAN: Yes. Hard to imagine what sort of people these are.  
DOCTOR: They're intelligent, anyway. Very intelligent.  
IAN: Yes, but how do they use their intelligence? What form does it take?  
DOCTOR: Oh, as if that matters. What these instruments tell us is that we're
in the midst of a very, very advanced civilised society.  
SUSAN: Here it is. The thing that's ticking. It's over here. It's a Geiger
counter.  
IAN: But look at the needle! It's past the danger point.  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, that explains a lot of things, doesn't it. A jungle turned
to stone, the barren soil and the fact that we're not feeling well.  
IAN: Radiation sickness?  
DOCTOR: Yes, I'm afraid so. The atmosphere here is polluted with a very high
level of fallout, and we've been walking around in it completely unprotected.  
IAN: What? But how do you explain the buildings? They're intact.  
DOCTOR: A neutron bomb. Yes. It destroys all human tissue, but leaves the
buildings and machinery intact. Yes.  
IAN: What? But how much radiation, and how badly?  
DOCTOR: We need, we need drugs to be treated.  
IAN: But where are we going to find them?  
SUSAN: The Tardis will have to take us to another time and place where we can
be cured.  
IAN: But don't you remember? We can't move the ship until we find the mercury
for the fluid link!  
DOCTOR: For the fluid link, yes. Yes, I'm afraid I cheated a little on that. I
was determined to see the city, but everybody wanted to go on and, well, to
avoid arguments, in short, there's nothing wrong with the fluid link.  
SUSAN: What? Grandfather, do you mean to say that you risked leaving the ship
just to see this place?  
IAN: You fool. You old fool!  
DOCTOR: Abuse me as much as you like, Chesterton. The point is we need an
immediate return to the ship, and I suggest we leave at once.  
IAN: We're not leaving until we've found Barbara.  
DOCTOR: Very well. You may stay and search for her if you wish, but Susan and
I are going back to the ship. Now, come along, child.  
IAN: All right, carry on, fine. How far do you think you'll get without this?
(the fluid link)  
DOCTOR: Give that to me.  
IAN: Not until we've found Barbara.  
DOCTOR: Give it to me, I say.  
IAN: No! It's time you faced up to your responsibilities. You got us here. Now
I'm going to make sure that you get us back.  
DOCTOR: Chesterton, this is  
IAN: We're wasting time. We should be looking for Barbara.  
SUSAN: He's right, Grandfather. We are wasting time.  
DOCTOR: Child, if only you'd think as an adult sometimes. Oh, very well. Let's
go then. Let's go.

**[City]**

(They walk out of the room to be met by a group of sink plungers wielded by
evil four foot tall pepper pots)  
DALEK: You will move ahead of us and follow my directions. This way.
Immediately.  
(Susan and the Doctor obey, but Ian hesitates)  
DALEK: I said immediately!  
(Ian runs down another corridor)  
DALEK: Fire!  
(A ray hits Ian, he turns from positive black and white to negative white and
black, then collapses)  
IAN: My legs! My legs!  
(Susan runs back to help)  
DALEK: Stop! Your legs are paralysed. You will recover shortly unless you
force us to use our weapons again. In that case, the condition will be
permanent. You two, help him.  
(Susan and the Doctor help Ian up)  
IAN: My legs, my legs. I can't use my legs.

**[Detention cell]**

DALEK [OC]: Stop here.  
(The door opens and Ian is carried in by Susan and the Doctor)  
BARBARA: Susan!  
SUSAN: Miss Wright!  
IAN: Barbara, thank heaven we've found you. Are you all right?  
BARBARA: Yes. What's the matter? What's happened?  
IAN: Oh, I'm all right.  
SUSAN: He tried to get away and they hurt him.  
BARBARA: Can't you stand up?  
IAN: Not without help. The feeling's coming back, don't worry.  
BARBARA: Come over here.  
IAN: How about you, Barbara? We tried to look for you and then those machines
caught us.  
BARBARA: They trapped me in some sort of lift. It seemed to go down for ages.  
IAN: They didn't hurt you?  
BARBARA: No. Ian, what are they?  
IAN: I don't know. Barbara, did you notice anything? I mean, when they were
moving you about. Any little thing may help us.  
BARBARA: No, nothing much. They moved me from floor to floor, always in lifts.
Where we are now must be miles underground. Well, there wasn't any furniture
now I come to think about it.  
IAN: I'm afraid that's not very much help.  
BARBARA: Ian, do you think they really are just machines?  
IAN: What do you mean?  
BARBARA: Well, I was going to say, do you think there's someone inside them?  
(Susan laughs)  
IAN: That's a point. We haven't any idea what's inside them.  
BARBARA: I tried to think of how I could get away from them, but then I began
to feel so weak and giddy. It's getting worse now. I think they must have
drugged me in some way.  
IAN: It's not that. Barbara, we've got radiation sickness. All of us. The
Doctor's pretty badly hit.  
BARBARA: Well, how do you know it's radiation?  
SUSAN: We found a Geiger counter. It seems that all the time we've been in the
open, we've been exposed to it.  
BARBARA: Well, what's going to happen to us?  
DOCTOR: Well, unless, unless we get treatment, we shall die. Yes, we shall
die.

**[Control room]**

(The prisoners are being watched on a monitor)  
DALEK 1: Bring in the old man Thal prisoner. Two hundred days ago the
radiation count was ninety three.  
DALEK 2: It is now fifty eight. An impressive reduction.  
DALEK 1: It is still enough to destroy. Our prisoners are showing preliminary
stages of sickness already.  
DALEK 2: We know the Thals are able to live on the surface.  
DALEK 1: And that they must have found immunity.  
DALEK 2: Perhaps it is a drug. Is it failing them now? Why are these four
showing signs of radiation sickness?  
DALEK 1: A few questions will reduce the mystery.  
(The Doctor staggers in)  
DALEK 1: Do not move out of the light. Sit on the floor.  
DALEK 2: You are one of the Thal people?  
DOCTOR: I don't understand you.  
DALEK 1: Why are you suffering from radiation?  
DOCTOR: Why? Because we were not aware of it until it was too late, that's
why.  
DALEK 2: No, that is not true. We know the Thals have existed outside our
city.  
DALEK 1: The truth is your supply of drugs has failed, and you came into the
city to see if you could find more.  
DOCTOR: No, no. Thals? What are you talking about? We're not Thals, or
whatever you may call them. Can't you see we're very ill.  
DALEK 1: You and your companions need a drug to stay alive.  
DOCTOR: We have no drugs. (softly) A drug? A drug. The drugs left outside the
Tardis.  
DALEK 2: Tardis? He is becoming delirious. I do not understand his words.  
DOCTOR: Listen to me.  
DALEK 1: Stay in the light.  
DOCTOR: My friends and I are travellers. We did find something in the forest
near our encampment. They may be the drugs you're referring to. Why not let
one of us go and bring the phials here? And under guard, if necessary.  
DALEK 1: We cannot move outside the city.  
DOCTOR: Very well, then. Let one of us go and hold the others until he
returns.  
DALEK 1: Providing whoever you send understands the rest of you will be held
responsible for his return.  
DOCTOR: He will have our lives in his hands. That is enough.  
DALEK 1: Then we agree.  
DOCTOR: Tell me something about the people, the Thals.  
DALEK 1: Over five hundred years ago there were two races on this planet. We,
the Daleks, and the Thals. After the neutronic war, our Dalek forefathers
retired into the city, protected my our machines.  
DOCTOR: And the Thals?  
DALEK 1: Most of them perished in the war, but we know that there are
survivors. They must be disgustingly mutated, but the fact that they have
survived tells us they must have a drug that preserves the life force.  
DOCTOR: And knowing that these mutated creatures exist outside the city,
you're willing to send one of us in amongst them?  
DALEK 1: As you say yourself, all your lives depend on it.

**[Detention cell]**

(Susan and Barbara are helping Ian walk around. Only one leg is currently
working)  
BARBARA: Is it any easier?  
IAN: Yes, I think it is. I'm going to try and stand on my own.  
SUSAN: Be careful.  
IAN: I'll be all right. Oh, that's not too bad, is it?  
BARBARA: Why don't you sit down for a minute?  
IAN: No, no, no. I'll be all right.  
(He tries to walk, and falls)  
IAN: No good.  
BARBARA: Come on, sit down. It'll wear off in time.  
IAN: How are you feeling, Barbara?  
BARBARA: Not too good.  
IAN: Susan?  
SUSAN: Well, it doesn't seem to have affected me as much as the rest of you.  
(The Doctor enters)  
SUSAN: Grandfather!  
IAN: Are you all right?  
SUSAN: What happened?  
DOCTOR: In a moment, child. The phial of drugs left outside the Tardis,
remember?  
BARBARA: Yes, what about them?  
DOCTOR: It's possible that they may have been anti-radiation gloves. Drugs. I
can't be certain, but it does give us a chance. The people here, whoever they
may be, are very eager to get hold of them.  
IAN: None of us are in very good shape to go and get them.  
BARBARA: Oh, I could do it.  
IAN: No, it must be me.  
BARBARA: But you can't walk.  
IAN: Oh, I'll be all right in a couple of hours.  
DOCTOR: Whoever goes must be very careful. As far as I can ascertain, the
creatures out there are the ones who dropped the box. They're called Thals.
They're mutations.  
IAN: So it wasn't our captors who left the drugs behind?  
DOCTOR: No. If they were drugs. I've learnt quite a lot from the Daleks.  
IAN: The who?  
DOCTOR: The Daleks, our captors here. Oh, if I didn't feel so. Oh. But I was
right about the neutron bomb. The Daleks built this underground city as a kind
of huge shelter.  
IAN: But what about the, what do you call them, the Thals? I mean, how did
they survive out there? They  
DOCTOR: I don't know.  
IAN: Doctor. Doctor? I must get that drug quickly.  
SUSAN: He's burning hot.  
IAN: Yes. As soon as they take me to the surface, I'll ask for water. In the
meantime you must keep him as cool as you possibly can. I think there's some
life coming back into my toes.  
SUSAN: You can't go alone, Ian. I have to go with you.  
IAN: No, I want you to stay here, Susan.  
SUSAN: But I can't. I must go with you.  
IAN: Don't argue with me.  
SUSAN: You can't get into the ship.  
IAN: All right then, give me the key.  
SUSAN: It's not just a question of turning the key. The whole lock comes away
from the door.  
IAN: Susan, supposing these Daleks insist that only one of us goes. Then I'll
have to take the key and I'll have to go on trying until the door opens.  
SUSAN: No, you'd jam the lock. Look, it's a defence mechanism. There are
twenty one different holes inside the lock. There's one right place and twenty
wrong ones. If you make a mistake, you'll. Well, the whole inside of the lock
will melt.  
IAN: There's nothing else for it, then. We must go together. Come on, let's
see if I can walk. No, it's all right, Barbara. You take it easy. Rest. My
right leg is better, you know. I've got feeling in this one, but the left is
just pins and needles.  
(A Dalek enters)  
DALEK 1: You must leave now.  
IAN: I'm not well enough yet.  
DALEK 1: You must leave now.  
IAN: My legs are still  
DALEK 1: Which one of you is going?  
(Ian tries to walk and falls)  
IAN: You must give me more time.  
SUSAN: Can't you see how weak he is?  
DALEK 1: There are others.  
BARBARA: Oh, Ian, I can't. The whole room's going round.  
SUSAN: Must I? Alone?  
BARBARA: You can't let her go alone. She's just a child. Plead with them.
Anything!  
IAN: Susan, you see how ill they both are. We can't afford to wait until I can
walk. An hour might make all the difference.  
SUSAN: I'm so afraid.  
IAN: Go on.  
SUSAN: Yes.  
IAN: Don't stop for anything. Straight there, straight back.  
DALEK 1: Are you ready?  
IAN: Yes, all right.  
SUSAN: I'm coming now.  
(The Dalek and Susan leave)  
BARBARA: Ian, the others in the forest. He said they were mutations.  
IAN: But what else could I do?

**[Control room]**

DALEK 2: The child has set out.  
DALEK 1: Her direction is being followed on the rangescopes?  
DALEK 2: Yes.  
DALEK 1: Mark her movements carefully. If there are more Thal people living in
the jungle, she will try to contact them.  
DALEK 2: I understand. If she returns with the drugs, am I to allow the
prisoners to use it?  
DALEK 1: No. They will die in time. There only value is in bringing us enough
of the Thal drug to duplicate it for our own use.  
ALL: Yes, at last we have a chance.

**[Detention cell]**

BARBARA: He's getting worse.  
IAN: How long did the Doctor say we'd last without treatment? Forty eight
hours?  
BARBARA: I don't know. It's hit him so badly, Ian.  
IAN: Yes. How are you feeling?  
BARBARA: Oh, I ache all over. I have difficulty in keeping my eyes open.  
IAN: Yes, I'm about the same. All his fault! Had to have his own way, see the
city.  
BARBARA: Oh, Ian, that doesn't help.  
IAN: I know, I know.  
BARBARA: We must wait. That's all we can do.  
IAN: Wait. Yes. An hour ago I thought we might try and escape, watch their
movements, make a plan. There's always a chance. Now we're too late. I think
even if they left the doors wide open we wouldn't have the strength to crawl
through them.  
BARBARA: How long has she been gone?  
IAN: About an hour. She should just be on the edge of the jungle by now.

**[Forest]**

(There's thunder, wind and lightning as Susan makes her way through the
petrified jungle. Something else is moving too. She runs on, falls, and sees -
what?)

**[Detention cell]**

BARBARA: He's so hot. It's like a fever.  
IAN: Yes, his breathing's so bad. What do you think, Barbara?  
BARBARA: I don't know. Even if Susan got back now, I don't know whether she'd
be in time. Give me his coat.  
IAN: Here you are.  
(She uses it to make a pillow for the Doctor's head)  
IAN: Barbara, come on now.  
BARBARA: I'm all right.  
IAN: Sit down. No, you rest. You can't do anything more for him.  
BARBARA: It's so hot in here.  
IAN: Yes. Now you try and sleep, Barbara. Try and sleep.  
BARBARA: Yes, I'd like to sleep.  
IAN: Yes.  
BARBARA: It's so hot.  
(Ian realises he can walk properly again, and goes to the door, but doubles
over with pain)  
IAN: Hurry, Susan. Hurry, Susan!  
(Susan is running, terrified, through the jungle)

**[Control room]**

DALEK 2: I have just come from the prisoners. The old man is dying.  
DALEK 1: Then he must die. There is no help we can give him. How are the
others?  
DALEK 2: The woman is sleeping very heavily. The young man fights against it.  
DALEK 1: What of the girl? Has she reached the jungle?  
DALEK 2: Yes, the rangerscopes tracked her that far. Now they have lost her.

**[Tardis]**

(Susan has made it, and picks up the box from the chair where she left it. She
remembers what she was told)  
IAN [OC]: Don't stop for anything. Straight there, straight back. An hour
might make all the difference.  
SUSAN: I must. I must.  
(She opens the doors again and steps out into the storm)

__**Episode Three - The Escape**__

**[Forest]**

(Susan steps outside the Tardis and meets a tall blond man)  
SUSAN: Who are you? What do you want?  
ALYDON: Don't be afraid.  
SUSAN: What do you want? But they said you were, but they called you. But
you're not. You're perfect.  
ALYDON: I tried to speak to you in the forest yesterday, but I frightened you.
I'm sorry.  
SUSAN: I was frightened. I was terrified.  
ALYDON: Yes, I was very clumsy. I have come now to make certain you understand
how to use the drugs I left for you.  
SUSAN: You left? But we thought they had been dropped by accident.  
ALYDON: No.  
SUSAN: We didn't even know they were drugs.  
MAN: You mean you haven't taken them yet? But you must.  
SUSAN: That's why I came back, you see. My grandfather and two of my friends
are prisoners in the city and  
ALYDON: No, please, please, you're too quick for me. There are four of you, I
know that. I've watched you. And what do you mean, prisoners?  
SUSAN: Well, don't you know about the Daleks?  
ALYDON: So the Dalek people have survived. But do they live in that dead city?  
SUSAN: Well, underneath it, anyway. You see, the Daleks want the drugs too,
and they won't let us go until I bring them back to them.  
ALYDON: But why should they want the drugs? Surely they must have some
themselves if they're still alive.  
SUSAN: I don't know. Look, my grandfather and my friends are terribly ill. I
must take the drug back to them.  
ALYDON: No. No, no, wait. Are you sure the Daleks want the drugs for your
friends and not for themselves?  
SUSAN: I hadn't thought of that.  
MAN: Do you trust them?  
SUSAN: No. I'm not sure.  
ALYDON: You still have the drugs I left for you. I shall give you a further
supply which you must hide as best you can. Do you trust me?  
SUSAN: Yes.  
ALYDON: I am Alydon of the Thal race. I shall go with you through the forest
to the outer wall of the city, if you will allow me.  
SUSAN: Oh, thank you. I don't understand. They said you were. Well, they
called you mutations.  
ALYDON: Here, take my cloak. You're cold.  
SUSAN: Thank you.  
ALYDON: We are the survivors of a final war. But the radiation still persists
and that is why your friends are ill. I wonder if the Daleks have seen us.  
SUSAN: Seen you?  
ALYDON: I mean, if they call us mutations, what must they be like?

**[Control room]**

DALEK 2: I have returned the girl to the cell.  
DALEK 1: Very well.  
DALEK 2: They are asking for water.  
DALEK 1: Give them some. It is clear that the girl must have made contact with
the Thals.  
DALEK 2: Our prisoners could bring the Thals to us.  
DALEK 1: Precisely that.

**[Detention cell]**

SUSAN: The Thal said the drug would act quickly.  
IAN: Don't give him any more water, Susan. His pulse is steady now anyway.  
BARBARA: My arms are tingling.  
SUSAN: Yes, Alydon said you'd feel that. It just means the drug's working,
that's all.  
IAN: This Alydon of yours seems to have kept his wits about him. Giving you
that extra supply of drugs.  
SUSAN: Yes. It was strange when the Daleks found it. I thought first of all
they were going to keep both lots. Then they suddenly seemed to change their
mind and gave the second lot back to me.  
IAN: Yes. Still, the Thals seem more friendly.  
SUSAN: Oh, yes. Alydon gave me this cloak to keep me warm.  
BARBARA: Why do the Daleks think they're mutations?  
SUSAN: I don't know. Judging by Alydon, they're magnificent people.  
DOCTOR: Susan.  
SUSAN: Grandfather? You'll feel better soon. I brought the drugs back.  
DOCTOR: Give me a little while and then we must go back to the ship.  
SUSAN: No, we're still prisoners.  
DOCTOR: Oh, are we? Oh, yes. Well, we must leave here soon. We must, must
leave. Yes.  
SUSAN: As soon as grandfather's properly awake we must try and find a way of
helping the Thals.  
BARBARA: We can't even help ourselves, locked up in here like this.  
SUSAN: We must try and talk to the Daleks. Alydon says the Thals are going to
starve unless they can find new supplies of food. You see, after the war, the
Thals that survived managed to cultivate small plots of land. Well, that's how
they've survived ever since. But they've always had to be very, very careful,
because the crops have always been in danger. But, you see, they rely on a
great rainfall that only happens about every four or five years. Well, it's
two years overdue now, and all their crops are ruined. Well, that's why the
whole Thal race had to leave their plateau and go in search of food.

**[Control room]**

SUSAN [on monitor]: Alydon says, unless we can help them arrange some sort of
treaty with the Daleks, they're all going to die.  
IAN [on monitor]: But how can we, Susan?  
SUSAN [on monitor]: Well, he wants to talk to the Daleks. He said if they
agree to supply food for them, then one of us must take a message outside the
city.  
DALEK 2: We could let this catastrophe destroy the Thals.  
DALEK 1: Will they let themselves starve to death? No. I feel preserving our
prisoners was a good idea.  
DALEK 2: And an arrangement to bring the Thals inside our city an even better
one.  
DALEK 1: We'll let our prisoners sleep and then give them food. After that, we
can plan.  
DALEK 2: Why not begin now?  
DALEK 1: Because the lapse of time, the relaxation of sleep, the provision of
food, all these things will give them a false sense of security.

**[Detention cell]**

(They are woken by the door opening, and a pepperpot enters bearing gifts.)  
DALEK 1: We have brought you food and more water. (Barbara takes it) The girl
is to come with me.  
IAN: Why?  
SUSAN: It's all right.  
BARBARA: Well, what are they going to do to her?  
DALEK 1: She will be returned. We are going to help the Thals, which is what
you want us to do. Come now.  
(The door closes)  
DOCTOR: I can't understand. Why have they taken Susan?  
IAN: How do they know we want to help the Thals?

**[Jungle, outside the Tardis]**

(A group of Thals arrive)  
ALYDON: Ah, Ganatus.  
GANATUS: Alydon.  
ALYDON: You've been longer than I thought.  
GANATUS: The path was rough.  
ALYDON: The dead city lies over there.  
TEMMOSUS: (a man with a headdress) Get the tent here, towards the west.  
DYONI: (a young woman) What is it, Temmosus.  
TEMMOSUS: This must be the craft in which the strangers arrived here. So,
Alydon, we were right to believe the city inhabited.  
ALYDON: Yes, Temmosus.  
TEMMOSUS: I wonder what they'll be like. How they'll be disposed towards us.  
GANATUS: They are Daleks.  
TEMMOSUS: Yes, but we've changed over the centuries. Why shouldn't they? The
once famous warrior race of Thals are now farmers.  
DYONI: But the Daleks were teachers, weren't they, Temmosus?  
TEMMOSUS: Yes, they were. And philosophers.  
GANATUS: Perhaps they are the warriors now.  
TEMMOSUS: From the distance, the city looks as if they make science and
invention their profession. It's a magical architecture. Perhaps we can
exchange ideas with them, learn from them.  
GANATUS: Perhaps.  
TEMMOSUS: And these others, they arrived here in this weird object?  
ALYDON: Yes, Temmosus.  
TEMMOSUS: And you trust them, Alydon?  
ALYDON: I have only spoken with the young girl, but if the others are anything
like her, I would trust them absolutely.  
TEMMOSUS: I hope you're not too generous in your beliefs. What do you say,
Dyoni?  
DYONI: I have no opinions in the matter.  
GANATUS: How unusual.  
TEMMOSUS: Where is the girl now?  
ALYDON: I have given her the drugs and she has returned to the city.  
DYONI: It would have been better if you had given it to a man instead of a
girl.  
ALYDON: I had no chance. They're prisoners in the city.  
GANATUS: Prisoners?  
TEMMOSUS: Are you sure?  
ALYDON: I'm afraid so. From everything the young girl said, the Daleks are
certainly very suspicious of others.  
TEMMOSUS: Tell me, Alydon. How old is this young girl?  
ALYDON: No longer a child, not yet a woman.  
TEMMOSUS: Ah, then perhaps it's safe for you to talk to her, if she's not yet
a woman.  
(Dyoni stalks off as Ganatus laughs)  
ALYDON: I don't understand her. If we don't find a new food supply for next
year, we're finished. Doesn't she understand that? We're all working towards
the same end.  
GANATUS: Now there's a double meaning for you.  
TEMMOSUS: But don't you realise that Dyoni sees her personal future in you.
You must remember that when we left our plateau and started on this journey,
she was little more than a child. But that was four years ago.  
ALYDON: I'm not quite so blind.  
TEMMOSUS: Well, go on. What have you planned?  
ALYDON: The young girl will speak with the Daleks, and a message will come
from the city.  
TEMMOSUS: Direct from the girl?  
ALYDON: Yes.  
TEMMOSUS: But how shall we know that it is not a trick?  
ALYDON: Well, she told me her name> Susan. And that is how the message is to
be signed. Otherwise, we shall know the Daleks are hostile to us.

**[Control room]**

(Susan is taking dictation from the Daleks)  
DALEK 2: Have liquid foods, water in abundance. We can also supply unlimited
quantities of fresh vegetables which are forced in artificial sunlight.  
SUSAN: Just a minute. Artificial sunlight. All right, go on.  
DALEK 2: In return, we shall expect the Thals to help us in the re-cultivation
of the land surrounding the  
DALEK 1: Why have you stopped writing?  
SUSAN: Well, I can only ask them. I can't accept for them.  
DALEK 1: Then put down that we expect them to help us.  
SUSAN: Yes, I'm sure they will.  
DALEK 1: Please sit still while we examine what you've written.  
(Dalek 2 holds it up to Dalek 1's eyepiece)  
DALEK 1: What is the last word here?  
SUSAN: The last word?  
DALEK 1: Su San. Stop that noise. (a giggle)  
SUSAN: It's what I'm called. It's my name. Susan.  
DALEK 1: Have you told the Thals that you would write this name on the
message?  
SUSAN: Yes. Look, there's no need to be frightened of them. They're very
friendly people. All they want is food. Let me take the message to them.  
DALEK 1: No.  
SUSAN: Why not?  
DALEK 1: We have planned otherwise.  
IAN [on monitor]: But how long are they going to keep Susan, Doctor?  
BARBARA [on monitor]: What do they want with her?  
DOCTOR [on monitor]: Perhaps they're going to let us go. I don't know.  
(The Dalek switches it off)  
SUSAN: We knew you could hear us, 'cause you knew about the Thals and the
food.  
DALEK 1: It does not matter. We have the message now.

**[Detention cell]**

IAN: All set, Doctor? (loud) The whole pattern of things is suspicious. Just
because the Daleks didn't kill us is no reason to trust them.  
DOCTOR: Or suspect them either.  
BARBARA: Or maybe they just have a different way of doing things.  
IAN: The Thals have helped us. The Daleks put us in a cell. I know which of
the two I prefer.  
DOCTOR: I tell you, the Daleks are brilliant people. I think we ought to
cooperate with them.  
IAN: Ever since you talked alone to the Daleks, you've been on their side.
What have they done, bribed you or something? Look, I want to know why. Why
are you on their side and against the rest of us.  
DOCTOR: Take your hands off me. How dare you shout  
SUSAN: Leave my grandfather alone!  
IAN: I want an answer.  
BARBARA: Stop arguing.  
IAN: Please give me space.  
BARBARA: Ian.  
DOCTOR: Keep away from me!  
(Susan jumps on Ian's shoulders)  
BARBARA: Susan, what are you doing?  
(She's using the piggy-back ride to pull the spy camera out of the ceiling)  
IAN: Did I hurt you?  
SUSAN: No, of course you didn't.  
DOCTOR: Don't waste time.  
IAN: Fix you for a while.

**[Control room]**

DALEK 2: Do you think it was broken accidentally in their struggle?  
DALEK 1: No, the cable is strong. They have broken it deliberately.  
DALEK 3: They can be moved immediately to another room, the eye repaired.  
DALEK 1: No.  
DALEK 2: Extermination, then.  
DALEK 1: There is no escape from the room that holds them. They may well be
useful again. We shall deal with the Thals.

**[Detention cell]**

DOCTOR: The point is, how do we get out of here? Wait until the Daleks open
the door, and force the issue?  
BARBARA: But we'd never get near them.  
SUSAN: We must try and trick them. We must all pretend to be dead. Then when
they come in to investigate, we must rush down the corridor  
IAN: Yes, and then what? No. We must find a way of putting these machines out
of action.  
BARBARA: Yes. Remember what they did to your legs.  
IAN: Yes.  
DOCTOR: The floors are metal. All the floors are metal.  
BARBARA: Well, so are the streets of the city outside.  
DOCTOR: Why?  
BARBARA: I don't know.  
DOCTOR: No, I know you don't know. I mean, why do they use metal? Is it
because it lasts longer? Or because  
IAN: Because it's essential to them. That's an idea.  
BARBARA: Well how is that going to help us?  
IAN: Well, if metal is essential  
DOCTOR: No, no, no, now listen. Let's concentrate on the Daleks. Have you
noticed, for example, that when they move about there's a sort of acrid smell?  
SUSAN: Yes, yes, I've noticed that.  
BARBARA: I know. A fairground.  
IAN: That's it. Dodgems.  
DOCTOR: It's electricity. I think they're powered that way.  
IAN: Yes. But just a minute. They have no pick-up or anything. And only the
base of the machine touches the floor. How do they complete the circuit?  
SUSAN: Batteries?  
DOCTOR: No, no. I believe the Daleks have discovered a way to exploit static
electricity. Very ingenious, if I'm right.  
BARBARA: What, drawing power from the floor?  
DOCTOR: Precisely. If I'm right, of course. Now, what do we know apart from
guessing how they are powered?  
SUSAN: Well, they can see all round them.  
BARBARA: Yes. Their eye is flexible, like a large camera lens.  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, yes, yes. Now, Chesterton, do you mind concentrating, young
man?  
IAN: Hmm? Susan. The cloak the Thals gave you.  
SUSAN: Yes, it's just behind you.  
IAN: Barbara, come here. What do you think this is made of?  
BARBARA: I don't know. It isn't plastic, I don't think it's nylon either.  
IAN: Whatever it is, it'll do for what we want.  
DOCTOR: And what will it do, young man? Hmm?  
IAN: Insulate. If you are right, Doctor, about the Daleks taking up power from
the floor, this is a perfect way of putting them out of action.

**[Thal camp (outside the Tardis)]**

(A Thal returns with a metal lizard on his shoulder)  
DYONI: Oh, look, Ganatus, they've found a Magneton under some bushes.  
GANATUS: Dead, I hope.  
DYONI: Well, of course it's dead. Oh, I never know when you're serious and
when you're joking.  
GANATUS: We'll be able to recharge the hand lights. I'll go and tell Antodus.  
DYONI: Is he still afraid of the dark? I'm sorry, I  
GANATUS: My brother isn't afraid of anything.  
ALYDON: Temmosus, suppose the Daleks refuse to help us. What then?  
TEMMOSUS: I believe the Daleks hold the key to our future. Whatever that
future may be, we must accept it gracefully and without regret.  
ALYDON: I wish I could be as objective as you. We've lived for so long a time.  
TEMMOSUS: Perhaps we have lived too long. I've never struggled against the
inevitable. It's a vain occupation. But I should always advise you to examine
very closely what you think to be inevitable. It's surprising how often
apparent defeat can be turned to victory.  
GANATUS: This was found at the city gates.  
ALYDON: What does it say?  
(as if they could read Earth English....)  
TEMMOSUS: They're going to help us! It's signed by the girl, Susan. She says
the Dalek people have no malice towards us, and they hope that they can work
with us to build a new and safe world, free from the fear of war. They have
the ability to produce food by means of synthetic sunlight, and they have left
a quantity of it in the entrance hall of their main building. We are to
collect it tomorrow. So there is a future for us.

**[Detention cell]**

(Susan is listening at the door)  
SUSAN: Shh. He's coming.  
DOCTOR: Ready?  
IAN: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Now all of you watch very carefully. See that you notice every detail
in that machine, right?  
(The door opens. The Dalek is bringing a tray)  
DALEK 1: Move back from the door.  
(Susan and Ian move into the middle of the room)  
DALEK 1: Take the food.  
(Susan does, and gives it to the Doctor. The Dalek backs out and the door
closes)  
IAN: I'll be able to jam the door with a piece of this. (the spy camera)  
SUSAN: He seemed to be able to cover all of us.  
BARBARA: It's impossible to hide from it.  
IAN: Yes. Perhaps we can throw a coat over the lens.  
BARBARA: Surely it would see you.  
IAN: Yes. Doctor, perhaps we can stage something. You know, a distraction. And
when the lens looks the other way, throw something over it.  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.  
BARBARA: Now, wait a minute. Susan, throw me your shoes.  
(Barbara picks the jungle soil off the soles)  
IAN: What are you up to?  
BARBARA: Making mud.  
(Later)  
DOCTOR: If he's on time, we have three minutes.  
IAN: I'm ready.  
DOCTOR: How's the mud?  
BARBARA: It's very sticky and very nasty.  
DOCTOR: Very good. Very good idea.  
SUSAN: Shall I spread the cloak over?  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes. Not too near the door. We don't want to make him suspicious.  
SUSAN: Just down there?  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes. Quickly. Good, child.  
IAN: He's coming.  
DOCTOR: Mind your head.  
(Ian slides the camera under the edge of the door as it starts to open, and
rolls into the middle of the room with everyone else)  
DALEK 1: Take this.  
(Susan takes the tray, and the Dalek backs out. The door fails to close and an
alarm sounds. The Dalek comes back in)  
DOCTOR: Now!  
(Barbara slams the mud over the eyepiece)  
DALEK 1: Keep away. Keep away from me.  
(The Doctor and Ian try to drag it onto the cloak. It starts to flail around)  
DALEK 1: Keep away from me! Keep away! Keep away!  
IAN: That's a gun! That's a gun!  
DALEK 1 : Keep away from me! Keep away from me! Keep away from me! Keep away
from me! Keep away from me!  
(Finally they get it onto the cloak)  
SUSAN: Yes, I got it!  
DOCTOR: Well done, Susan.  
BARBARA: Ian, come on out of the way.  
DOCTOR: Are you all right, Susan?  
SUSAN: Yes, Grandfather.  
DOCTOR: Splendid, splendid.  
IAN: I think I'm all right. Swing it round. Keep out of the way, Susan.  
SUSAN: Yes.  
IAN: Now, I think it's worked. Take your hand off the gun. It has! It's
worked! Now, there must be a catch here somewhere. I've found one.  
(He lifts the Dalek lid, and puts it down again very quickly)  
IAN: Susan, Barbara, go in the corridor and keep a lookout.  
BARBARA: Yes.  
IAN: You'll have to help me. (they lift the lid again) Let's roll it off the
cloak. A bit more, all right?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
IAN: Give me that cloak. That's it. All right. Now.  
(They wrap the cloak around the contents of the Dalek)  
IAN: Lift.  
(The Doctor dumps it in the corner)  
IAN: Now, see if I can get inside it. All clear in the corridor?  
SUSAN + BARBARA: Yes.  
SUSAN: I think there's a sentry down the other end of the corridor.  
BARBARA: Well, they made such a terrible noise. Ian, hurry.  
IAN: Not much room for my legs, but try the top.  
DOCTOR: Barbara, Susan, give me a hand. Move it down gently. (they lower the
lid) How is it?  
IAN: (Dalek-like) It's very cramped indeed.  
DOCTOR: Well, can't you sound more like a Dalek?  
BARBARA: Yes, in a monotone. You've heard them.  
IAN: Do you mean like this?  
DOCTOR: That's it.  
SUSAN: Can you see all right?  
IAN: No. There's some sort of screen. No, it's the mud. Wipe the mud off the
lens.  
SUSAN: Oh, yes, all right. It's all clogged up. Is that better?  
IAN: Yes, I can see now.  
SUSAN: Good.  
IAN: I can't make this thing move. It's full of controls.  
DOCTOR: Don't worry, we'll push you.  
IAN: It moves well enough.  
SUSAN: Yes.  
BARBARA: Surely they'll know that we're pushing you.  
DOCTOR: No, no, no, it won't be suspicious at all.

**[Corridor]**

IAN: All right now, Susan, Barbara. You get in front and pretend I'm taking
you for questioning.  
SUSAN: Right.  
BARBARA: Yes.  
IAN: And Susan.  
SUSAN: Yes?  
IAN: You lead us. You know the way.  
SUSAN: All right. This way, then.  
(and a little clawed hand pokes out from under the cloak in the cell)

__**Episode Four - The Ambush**__

**[Corridor]**

(Barbara and Susan are still pulling Ian along by the sink-plunger)  
IAN: Hey. Let go a minute. I think I've found out how to operate this thing.
Yes, I can. Quick, Doctor, get in front. Ready? Off we go.  
(A little further along)  
SUSAN: Wait. This looks like the place. Stay there. (She looks around a corner
and comes back) There's a great iron door with a Dalek on guard. And beyond
the door there's a lift.  
DOCTOR: It's up to you now, Chesterton. You have to do as little talking as
possible.  
IAN: All right.  
DALEK: Stop.  
IAN: The council wishes to question the prisoners.  
DALEK: I have not been informed. Wait.  
SUSAN: No! I'm not going! No!  
DALEK: Hold her.  
IAN: I have got her. Now hold still. Help me to get them inside.  
(The Dalek pushes Susan into the lift)  
IAN: You too.

**[Room]**

DALEK: Shall I help you to the fourth level with them?  
IAN: No. Close the doors. The girl cannot run far inside.  
(Once the door is closed, the Doctor pulls a lead from a sensor near it)  
DOCTOR: That's fixed the door.  
BARBARA: That was a very good idea, Susan.  
IAN: He didn't hurt you?  
SUSAN: No, not really.  
IAN: Well, help me to get out of this thing. I'm suffocating.  
BARBARA: The clasp is stuck.  
DOCTOR: Here, let me help fix it.

**[Corridor]**

(The guard Dalek makes his report)  
DALEK: I have just passed the prisoners through into lift shaft seven.  
DALEK 1 [OC]: There are no orders to move the prisoners. Hold them.  
(It tries to open the door, and fails)  
DALEK: The door is locked. Emergency alarm.  
DALEK 1 [OC]: Attention. Immobilise lift shaft seven floor area.

**[Room]**

IAN: They know. Come on, hurry up will you?  
DOCTOR: Wait a minute. There, it's free. Lift it from the top.  
SUSAN: Good. Hurry up.  
BARBARA: I can't move it. It won't budge.  
DOCTOR: Chesterton, try and force it up from the inside.  
IAN: I'm trying. No, no, it's no good. There's something jammed inside here.
Forcing it's only making it worse.  
(There is banging on the door)  
BARBARA: Ian, come on, hurry.  
IAN: I, I can't move it!  
SUSAN: Ow! That door's red hot.  
DOCTOR: They're cutting through the door.  
BARBARA: We'll have to move you into the lift.  
DOCTOR: Yes, but hurry, hurry.  
SUSAN: It's stuck.  
BARBARA: I don't understand it. It moved easily enough before.  
DOCTOR: They've magnetised the floor. You feel it?  
BARBARA: Are you sure?  
DOCTOR: Yes. Chesterton, we're not able to get you into the lift.  
IAN: Yes, I realise that. Take the others away in the lift, Doctor.  
BARBARA: We're not going without you.  
IAN: Don't waste time. Go on.  
DOCTOR: Well, come on. He's right.  
BARBARA: No. I'm not leaving Ian.  
DOCTOR: When we get to the top, we'll send the lift back down for you. All
right?  
SUSAN: No, Grandfather, we can't.  
IAN: Go on, go on.  
SUSAN: No!  
IAN: Go on.  
DOCTOR: Come on, Susan.  
IAN: Barbara, for goodness sake, go.  
SUSAN: Oh, look!  
(The Daleks are cutting around the door. The three go up on the lift platform)  
IAN: I must, must get out.

**[Lift]**

BARBARA: How long will it take them to cut through the door?  
DOCTOR: Oh, maybe ten minutes. If we're lucky, longer.  
SUSAN: But even if he does get out, he's stuck down there. His only way out is
the lift. We must go back for him!  
DOCTOR: Susan, it's no good. We cannot do anything for him now, child.

**[Level One]**

(Barbara, Susan and the Doctor get out of the lift and send it back down
again)  
BARBARA: We should never have left him. It's so slow. It'll never reach him in
time.

**[Corridor]**

DALEK 1: It is nearly completed.

**[Room]**

(The Daleks enter the room and fire at the Dalek shell. It falls apart)  
DALEK 1: It is empty.  
DALEK 2: Lock the lift.  
DALEK 1: The emergency switch. Bring it down.

**[Level One]**

BARBARA: Come on, Ian. Come on.  
IAN [OC]: All right, I'm coming.  
(He gets out just before the lift goes back down again)  
IAN: They had about two inches of that door to cut through when I got out.  
SUSAN: Are you all right?  
IAN: Yes, thank you, Susan.  
DOCTOR: Well never mind that now. We must try and find a way out of this room.  
BARBARA: Daylight!  
IAN: Yes, but where exactly are we?  
DOCTOR: We're right at the top of the building. I can just see the surface of
the city. See over there? There's the edge of the petrified jungle.  
IAN: Yes. I'm trying to recognise the streets we came along.  
BARBARA: Everything looks so different from above. Do you see anything at all
that looks like  
IAN: What is it?  
BARBARA: Ian?  
IAN: What's the matter?  
BARBARA: There's someone down there. Look, by that sort of gateway thing
beyond the low building. I saw someone cross that space.  
DOCTOR: A Dalek?  
BARBARA: No, it was a man. A human being.  
SUSAN: The Thals! They've come for food supplies.  
DOCTOR: They're walking into an ambush.

**[Room]**

(A Dalek enters the lift)  
DALEK 2: Make no attempt to capture them. They are to be exterminated. You
understand? Exterminated.  
DALEK 1: I understand.

**[Level One]**

(As the Dalek ascends, the four are trying to attract the attention of the
Thals outside)  
IAN: Oh, it's no good. This room must be soundproof. We must find a way of
getting down there.  
DOCTOR: Yes, but how, dear boy?  
BARBARA: Isn't this a door?  
IAN: Yes! Doctor, open it.  
DOCTOR: Well, yes.  
SUSAN: What's the matter with it?  
DOCTOR: They've magnetised it, too. Come on, let's try and force it open.  
IAN: I can get my fingers in. Sorry. Yes, it's beginning to move.  
BARBARA: Ian, the lift's coming back!  
SUSAN: Oh, no.  
IAN: Doctor, keep working the door. (he tries the lift controls) It's no good.
Wait. Come over here and give me a hand. Quick, now. All push together.  
(They slide a sculpture over to the lift shaft)  
DOCTOR: It's open. I've done it.  
SUSAN: Good.  
IAN: Be right with you.  
DOCTOR: Look, what are you doing?  
IAN: Just cutting down the odds a bit. Are you ready? All together, one, two,
three, push!  
(The stone sculpture crashes down onto the lift, knocking it off it's tracks)  
IAN: All right, Doctor, through you go. Yes, go on.

**[City]**

(A cautious Alydon is leading Ganatus, Temmosus and a few other Thals to the
main entrance)  
TEMMOSUS: You're much too suspicious.  
ALYDON: Perhaps I am, Temmosus, but why should the Daleks help us?  
TEMMOSUS: You've been saying that ever since their message arrived. Perhaps
their offer was coldly worded, but friendship grows with time. These Daleks
must have believed that they were the only survivors on this planet.  
ALYDON: And are they relieved to find they aren't? Or are they shocked and
horrified, perhaps insanely jealous?  
TEMMOSUS: You've no reason to say that. I think you misjudge them.  
ALYDON: Well, yes, I'm being illogical, unfair if you like, but I just have an
instinct.  
TEMMOSUS: Listen. We must find a new source of food. The Daleks have it.
They've offered it to us. These are facts, Alydon, facts.  
ALYDON: Yes, yes, I know, but let me talk to them.  
TEMMOSUS: It's right that I should do so.  
ALYDON: But supposing  
TEMMOSUS: No, Alydon. And you must thrown off these suspicions. They're based
on fear, and fear breeds hatred and war. I shall speak to them peacefully.
They'll see that I'm unarmed. There's no better argument against war than
that.  
ALYDON: Yes, if they really want to listen.

**[Food area]**

(Four Daleks are in alcoves around the food supplies)  
DALEK 1: They are approaching.  
(The Daleks conceal themselves)

**[Gateway]**

(Ian, Barbara, Susan and the Doctor are running)  
SUSAN: Oh, Grandfather, come on. Come on, hurry.  
BARBARA: Where are we?  
IAN: By the city wall, I think. Yes, there's a gateway about fifty yards away.  
BARBARA: Are there any Daleks?  
IAN: Wait there. No, no, I think we're all right.  
DOCTOR: Well, lets get back to the ship.  
SUSAN: No, no, I must warn the Thals.  
DOCTOR: Susan.  
SUSAN: We can't let them walk into a trap.  
DOCTOR: The Thals are no concern of ours. We cannot jeopardise our lives
getting involved in an affair which is none of our business.  
BARBARA: Of course it's our business. The Thals gave us the anti-radiation
drug. Without that, we'd be dead!  
IAN: Yes, but the Doctor's got a point. There's no sense in risking our whole
party. You go back to the ship and I'll stay and warn the Thals.  
SUSAN: No, we're all in this together. We're all going to stay here.  
IAN: Susan, you do as I say! You go back to the ship with Barbara and your
grandfather.  
SUSAN: But don't you understand  
BARBARA: I know what Ian means. He stands a much better chance on his own if
he doesn't have us to worry about. Now, come on. We'll wait for you.  
IAN: I'll be there.  
DOCTOR: Good luck, Chesterton.  
IAN: Thank you. Go on.

**[Food Area]**

(Temmosus leads the Thals in, as Ian watches from his own hiding place)  
TEMMOSUS: Daleks, can you hear me? Daleks, the Thal people wish to live in
peace. If this is your wish too, then let us work together to rebuild our
world. We need your help, and in return we'll make the soil live again, grow
crops, build homes. The time for enmity is passed. If this is the kind of
future that you want, then send for us and we shall talk.  
(The Daleks come out of their concealment, behind him)  
TEMMOSUS: You need not decide now. We've been waiting for centuries. We shall
go on waiting.  
(He finally notices the Daleks, and tells his companions)  
TEMMOSUS: Take these things.  
IAN: No! It's a trap! Get out of here! Run!  
DALEK: Fire!  
(Temmosus is killed. Ian gets away and Alydon hides as the Daleks go after the
other Thals)

**[Gateway]**

IAN: Who are you?  
ALYDON: I am Alydon. You are the man who warned us?  
IAN: Yes. I'm sorry I was late.  
ALYDON: Yes, our leader Temmosus is dead.  
IAN: I know. I saw it.  
ALYDON: Why? Why kill him? They didn't even know him.  
IAN: We can't stand here discussing it. Get yourself and your men away from
here. Come on.

**[Thal camp]**

(The Thals are waiting, and so are our travellers)  
ELYON: No, not yet.  
DOCTOR: Fascinating. Absolutely fascinating. You know, these records must go
back nearly half a million years.  
DYONI: The complete history of our planet Skaro is here. It seems now that no
one will survive to read it.  
DOCTOR: Oh, nonsense, young lady. Your survival is all here. What, er, is this
a solar system?  
DYONI: Yes. Skaro is the twelfth planet. Here.  
DOCTOR: I see. And this? What is this planet?  
DYONI: Each of these maps is a tiny section of another solar system, so the
total picture can be built up.  
DOCTOR: Total? Oh, you have records of other systems?  
DYONI: Yes. Well, I say total. Of course, we were only able to map out as far
as our electroscopes allowed.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I see. I wonder if I could see the plans.  
DYONI: Oh, yes.  
DOCTOR: I might be able to fix our position. Oh, yes, yes. Absorbing, most
absorbing.  
SUSAN: Grandfather seems to be enjoying himself.  
ALYDON: Some of the children have heard something moving in the forest.  
IAN: It can't be the Daleks. They told us they couldn't come out of the city.  
ALYDON: Nevertheless, I think we should all be on our guard.  
ELYON: Here they are. Antodus has been wounded.  
GANATUS: We had to go round the other side of the city.  
ALYDON: Is he badly hurt?  
GANATUS: It's his shoulder.  
DYONI: I'll get some ointment, and something to cover the burns.  
SUSAN: We've got some in the ship.  
DYONI: There's some over here.  
GANATUS: We tried to go back for Temmosus.  
ELYON: Temmosus? What's happened to Temmosus?  
GANATUS: It was hopeless.  
ALYDON: These are the people the Daleks were holding prisoner. This is the man
who shouted to warn us.  
GANATUS: Thank you. Did the others get away, Alydon?  
ALYDON: Tecanda was killed.  
ALL: Tecanda?  
ALYDON: The rest of us escaped.  
BARBARA: The burns don't seem to be too bad.  
DYONI: I'll get some water for him to drink. Can you manage?  
BARBARA: Yes.  
GANATUS: Have you decided what we're going to do, Alydon? You must take the
place of Temmosus now.  
ALYDON: Yes. Yes, I know. If only I knew why the Daleks hated us. If I knew
that, I, I could alter our approach to them, perhaps.  
IAN: Your leader, Temmosus.  
ALYDON: Yes?  
IAN: Well, he appealed very sensibly to them. Any reasonable human beings
would have responded to him. The Daleks didn't. They obviously think and act
and feel in an entirely different way. They just aren't human.  
GANATUS: Yes, but why destroy without any apparent thought or reason? That's
what I don't understand.  
IAN: Oh, there's a reason. Explanation might be better. It's stupid and
ridiculous, but it's the only one that fits.  
ALYDON: What?  
IAN: A dislike for the unlike.  
ALYDON: I don't follow you.  
IAN: They're afraid of you because you're different from them. So whatever you
do, it doesn't matter.  
DYONI: What would you have us do? Fight against them?  
IAN: I didn't say that. But you must teach them to respect you. Show them some
strength.  
DYONI: But you really believe we ought to fight.  
IAN: Yes, I think it may have to come to that.  
DYONI: You understand as little about us as the Daleks do!  
IAN: What would you do if the Daleks could leave their city? If they came up
here and attacked you?  
ALYDON: We would go away, back to our plateau where we came from.  
BARBARA: You'd simply run away?  
IAN: Alydon, you can't go on running away. There are some things worth
preserving.  
GANATUS: We're not afraid to die. Temmosus proved that.  
IAN: I am not talking about dying. Look, you can't hand yourselves over to the
Daleks. Sooner or later, they're going to try and destroy you if they can.  
ALYDON: I can see you want to help us, but as Dyoni says, you don't
understand. There can never be any question of the Thals fighting the Daleks.
Come, Ganatus.  
BARBARA: I don't understand them. They're not cowards, they don't seem to be
afraid. Can pacifism become a human instinct?  
IAN: Pacifism? Is that it? Pacifism only works when everybody feels the same.  
BARBARA: Yes, but are they really pacifists? I mean, genuinely so. Or is it a
belief that's become a reality because they've never had to prove it. DOCTOR:
I say, I say, I think these'll interest you. (pictures) Look here. This is
these people's ancestor, the original Thal male. There was a neutron war here.
Most died and the survivors mutated. But in the case of the Thals, mutation
came round in full circle then refined itself into what you see.  
IAN: You mean this (humanoid) became  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes. It took hundreds of years, of course. In the second example,
our recent hosts, the mutation has not completed its full circle. Why, I don't
know. But do you remember that monstrosity we took out of its machine?  
IAN: Yes.  
DOCTOR: This is its forebear.  
IAN: The original Dalek.  
DOCTOR: Yes. They called them Dals then. Oh, it's all there, every moment of
it is Skaroene history. Minutely but brilliantly recorded. Priceless,
absolutely priceless.  
BARBARA: Is this a sword the Thal's holding?  
DOCTOR: Yes. They were the warriors then.  
BARBARA: Were they?  
DOCTOR: Undoubtedly.  
SUSAN: Antodus is feeling much better.  
DOCTOR: I'm very glad to hear he's improving. Well, now, I'm sure you all
agree with me, its time we went back to the ship. Now, come along.  
SUSAN: Oh, Grandfather, couldn't we stay a bit longer? The Thals are such nice
people.  
DOCTOR: And the Daleks are not, which is more important, my child.  
(A cortege walks past, carrying Temmosus' body)  
IAN: I wonder if there's any point in reminding the Thals of what they used to
be?  
DOCTOR: Why?  
BARBARA: Oh, they're opposed to fighting. We were trying to convince them that
it was a necessity for their own survival.  
DOCTOR: But our fate doesn't rest with the Thals, surely. Let's leave well
alone. We have ourselves to worry about. Now, come along, come along. Wasting
time.  
IAN: Maybe the Doctor's right.  
BARBARA: Yes. Let's get in the ship and get as far away from here as possible.  
DOCTOR: Oh, please, come along. Oh, by the way, let me have the fluid link,
will you? Oh, dear boy, now please, please, come along. You know I can't start
the ship without it.  
IAN: The fluid link.  
SUSAN: You've lost it?  
BARBARA: Ian, you can't have.  
IAN: No. The Daleks took it from me when they searched me. It's down there
somewhere. In the city.

__**Episode Five - The Expedition**__

IAN: The fluid link.  
SUSAN: You've lost it?  
BARBARA: Ian, you can't have.  
IAN: No. The Daleks took it from me when they searched me. It must be down
there somewhere. In the city.

**[Control room]**

DALEK 1: The drug has been duplicated.  
DALEK 2: And the distribution?  
DALEK 1: The drug is to be taken by sections of us so work will not be
interrupted.  
DALEK 2: Have you processed the pictures?  
DALEK 1: Appearing now on frequency 6.  
(A picture of the Doctor sitting outside the Tardis, looking at the Thal
history)  
DALEK 1: It is the elder prisoner.  
DALEK 2: Show second picture.  
DALEK 1: The girl and the young woman. Is that the body of the fourth
prisoner? The young man?  
DALEK 2: If so, he has been injured.  
DALEK 1: Show third picture.  
(Ian and Alydon)  
DALEK 1: They have made contact with the Thals.  
DALEK 2: It is logical that together they will attack us.

**[Thal camp]**

ALYDON: No. And that is my final word.  
(Alydon leaves)  
IAN: Be careful what you're doing up there, Susan.  
SUSAN: (up a tree) Oh, it's all right, Mister Chesterton. I'm quite safe.  
IAN: No good. I've tried everything I know. They just won't risk a fight with
the Daleks. The trouble is, I can't go too far.  
BARBARA: What do you mean?  
IAN: Well, why should they help us? Some of them are bound to get killed. What
argument can you use to make a man sacrifice himself for you?  
BARBARA: Ian, you don't seem to understand. We'll be prisoners here unless we
can think of some way of getting that fluid link back from the Daleks.  
IAN: I am quite well aware of that, Barbara.  
BARBARA: And you know very well they'll find a way out of their city.  
IAN: I know nothing  
BARBARA: Well, you know they will.  
SUSAN: Well, they need metal to travel on.  
BARBARA: Oh, they'll find a way. They're clever enough. They'll find us and
kill us, you know that as well as I do.  
IAN: Look, even supposing you're right, I will not ask the Thals to sacrifice
themselves for us. I'm sorry, Barbara, I just can't do it.  
BARBARA: Ian, why can't you see?  
(at the Tardis door)  
SUSAN: Any luck, Grandfather?  
DOCTOR: Hmm?  
SUSAN: Well, have you made another fluid link yet?  
DOCTOR: No, I can't, my child. And I've looked through all my spares and I've
really discovered we do need some mercury.  
SUSAN: Oh, no.  
DOCTOR: It's put us in a bit of a jam. I must get that fluid link back again.
I'm afraid my little trick has rather rebounded on me. What you might call
tempting providence, Chesserman.  
IAN: Well, don't worry about it now, Doctor. It's happened.  
DOCTOR: Yes, well, at least you're not vindictive.  
IAN: Well I will be if you don't get my name right.  
DOCTOR: Hmm?  
IAN: It's Chesterton.  
DOCTOR: Yes. Hey? I know that.  
BARBARA: How you two can stand there wasting time with small talk beats me.  
DOCTOR: I can assure you, young lady, I haven't been wasting my time. There's
always a way.  
SUSAN: You always think of something, Grandfather.  
DOCTOR: Thank you, my dear. Your faith is something that I prize very highly.
You all realise, of course, we cannot succeed against the Daleks alone?  
BARBARA: Of course not.  
DOCTOR: We have a ready-made army here. The Thals. They're strong, and they
have one great advantage against the Daleks. They can move so much more
quickly.  
IAN: They have one great disadvantage. They have no arms or ammunition.  
DOCTOR: Well, that's all right, young man. The mind will always triumph. With
me to lead them, the Thals are bound to succeed.  
SUSAN: But Grandfather, we've been talking and arguing about this all morning.
The Thals won't fight. They're against war.  
DOCTOR: My dear child, this is no time for morals. They must fight for us.  
IAN: Why?  
DOCTOR: Oh, my dear young man, I do hope you're not going to be difficult.  
BARBARA: The Doctor's right. Ian, can't you see? If only we can get the Thals
to attack the city, we could beat the Daleks and get the link back.  
DOCTOR: It's just common sense. Young lady, I've been underestimating you.  
IAN: I will not allow you to use the Thals to fight for us.  
DOCTOR: Are you challenging me?  
IAN: Yes, I am.  
BARBARA: Do I have any say in this?  
IAN: Of course you do.  
BARBARA: Well I think the Doctor's right and I want to get out of here.  
IAN: I am sorry, I'm not having anyone's death on my conscience.  
BARBARA: Except mine and Susan's and the Doctor's?  
DOCTOR: Quite so.  
IAN: The only way the Thals can fight is if they themselves want to. It must
have nothing whatsoever to do with us.  
SUSAN: I know what you mean. We must help the Thals to save themselves and not
just them help us.  
IAN: Exactly.  
BARBARA: All you're doing is playing with words.  
DOCTOR: We need action, not arguments.  
IAN: Now listen, you two. What victory are you going to show these people when
most of them have been killed? A fluid link? Is this what you're going to hold
up to them and say, 'Thank you very much. This is what you fought and died
for'?  
SUSAN: The thing is, can the Thals still fight?  
IAN: Well that's what we've got to find out. Are they cowards, or are they
just against fighting on principle?  
BARBARA: Well, how can we find out?  
IAN: Well, I've got an idea. But whatever I do, don't interfere. I'm not even
sure that I'm right.  
(He goes and picks up the container of all the Thal history)  
IAN: Well, let's see what happens.  
DOCTOR: Hmm, strange young man.  
SUSAN: He's right, though.  
BARBARA: Yes, he is.  
DOCTOR: Yes, we'll see.  
(Ian is talking to Alydon and the Thals)  
IAN: to have self- respect. At this moment, anyone could come in here. They
could rob, they could steal.  
DOCTOR: Let's see what he's up to.  
IAN: They could even kill you. And you wouldn't lift a finger to help
yourselves.  
ALYDON: We will not fight. There will be no more wars. Look at our planet.
This was once a great world, full of ideas and art and invention. In one day
it was destroyed. And you will never find one good reason why we should ever
begin destroying everything again. I'm sorry.  
IAN: You're not sorry. You stand here, mumbling a lot of words out of your
history. But it means nothing, nothing at all. You carry this around with you.
Your history records. Well, it must be valuable to you. Supposing I take it
down to the city and try and trade with the Daleks? Perhaps they'd think it
valuable enough to exchange for our fluid link.  
ALYDON: I don't believe you'd do it.  
IAN: I would.  
ALYDON: None of us would stop you.  
IAN: If I don't get the fluid link back, the four of us will die. Perhaps the
Daleks are more interested in people? Maybe they were holding us to experiment
on us? I could take them an alternative.  
(Ian grabs Dyoni by the arm and starts to lead her off. Alydon grabs Ian then
punches him)  
IAN: So there is something you'll fight for.

**[Experiment chamber]**

(A Dalek is whirling round and round)  
DALEK: Help. Cannot control. Cannot control. Help me. Help me. Help! Help!
Help! Help! Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah!

**[Control room]**

DALEK [OC]: Emergency. Emergency. All Daleks in section three are incapable of
working.  
DALEK 1: Section three? That was the first section to get the anti-radiation
drug received from the Thals.  
DALEK 2: Stand by for a general announcement. This is control. All
distribution of the anti-radiation drug is to be stopped immediately. The
Dalek race has become conditioned to radiation.  
DALEK 1: But if you are right, we are in danger.  
DALEK [OC]: All Daleks in section three are dying.  
DALEK 2: They must be examined immediately.  
DALEK 1: Look, the disease has reached us in here.  
(A Dalek is spinning around on the spot)  
DALEK 2: Then we cannot delay.  
DALEK 1: But what are we to do? Is this the end of the Daleks?  
DALEK 2: We need radiation to survive. So we must increase our supply of
radiation.  
DALEK 1: But there is only one way to do that.  
DALEK 2: Exactly. We may have to explode another neutron bomb.

**[Thal camp]**

(Night has fallen, but Dyoni and Alydon cannot sleep)  
DYONI: Why don't you sleep?  
ALYDON: Presently.  
DYONI: Are you angry with yourself for striking the young man?  
ALYDON: No, I knew he was trying to make me do it. I still couldn't stop
myself. Do you despise me for hitting him?  
DYONI: If you hadn't fought him, I think I would have hated you.  
ALYDON: I knew he wouldn't really take you and give you to the Daleks. But I
fought him. Oh, I wish Temmosus were here. What would he have said, Dyoni?
Which is the most important? To fight and live, or to die without fighting.  
(Barbara and Ganatus have overheard this)  
BARBARA: What will happen now?  
GANATUS: I don't know. We always do what the leader of our race decides for
us. He never decides anything without our full approval.  
BARBARA: And if Alydon decides not to help us? Well, we'll have to wait till
the morning. What's that light in the sky? It's a reflection from the city, I
suppose.  
GANATUS: No, the lake. Some sort of chemical in the water that makes it glow
in the moonlight.  
BARBARA: You've been down there?  
GANATUS: Yes. There's horror down there in the swamp. Five of us went there in
search of food, and only my brother and I came back.  
BARBARA: What happened to the others?  
GANATUS: Well, we found what was left of one of them. The lake is alive with
mutations, bred and crossbred until the original has long been replaced by.
I'm sorry, I'm being morbid.  
BARBARA: Oh, I don't mind as long as we're this far away. But I wonder why the
Daleks haven't cleaned it out? Killed everything?  
GANATUS: Why should they? Isn't it the perfect defence for the back of a city?
Only a fool would attack the city from the lake.

**[Control room]**

(We are looking through a Dalek eye-piece)  
DALEK 2: Has the anti-radiation drug distribution been stopped?  
DALEK 3: Yes. Only Daleks in section two and three received it. All Daleks in
section three have now died.  
DALEK 2: Daleks in section two are to be brought to the sonic chamber.  
DALEK 3: We will direct the air polluted by radiation away from the nuclear
reactors into the sonic chamber.  
DALEK 2: And if they do not die, we shall have our answer.  
DALEK 3: But if we need radiation, we can never rebuild the world outside.  
DALEK 1: We do not have to adapt to the environment. We will change the
environment to suit us.

**[Thal camp]**

ALYDON: I have one question to ask of you. If we do not help you, what will
you do?  
IAN: We'll find our way into the city, and take back our lost equipment.  
ALYDON: You see, we cannot stand by and let these people die. If we do not
help them, it would be the same as if we had killed them ourselves. Well, the
way I have reasoned is this. The Daleks are strong and they hate us. And I am
sure they will find a way to come out of their city and kill us. So it is not
merely a question of whether we go off in a vain search for food and in all
probability starve to death. We face death now. In the city is enough food for
all of us and all of the Daleks, a hundred times over. My conclusion is this.
There is no indignity in being afraid to die. But there is a terrible shame in
being afraid to live. If none of you agree with my reasons, then let me go
with these people, and I will help you elect a new chief.  
GANATUS: I'll go with you, Alydon.  
THAL: And I.  
THAL 2: Let's start at once.  
ANTODUS: And I.  
IAN: Thank you.  
(Ganatus has got a map of the area)  
ALYDON: You knew what my decision would be.  
GANATUS: I could always have destroyed it if you'd decided differently.  
DOCTOR: If we get this intelligent anticipation, we shall succeed. Let's see
this. Now, what is this area here?  
GANATUS: The swamp. Here are the mountains. This is the far side of the city.
I've been into the swamp. It's surrounded by lakes, here, as you see. The
lakes are inhabited by all sorts of strange creatures.  
IAN: Can we get into the city this way?  
ALYDON: Over the mountains?  
IAN: Yes.  
GANATUS: That means going through that swamp.  
ALYDON: We can't go through the swamp. It's too dangerous.  
GANATUS: It is dangerous, yes, but I realised last night when I was talking to
Barbara that it is undefended.  
ALYDON: Undefended? It's a perfect natural barrier. All those creatures, you
know that yourself.  
GANATUS: Yes, I know, but I mean the Daleks won't be on guard there. There's a
chance to take them by surprise. Believe me, I'm not happy about this, but
it's the best possible chance there is.  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes. Well, now, I suggest we split into two groups. The one to
distract the Daleks on the city wall side, and the others to try and force a
way through the mountains.  
IAN: Yes, I think that's the best plan.  
DOCTOR: Are we all agreed?  
ALYDON: Yes. Very well then. That is what we must do.

**[Control room]**

DALEK 2: The laser scope is transmitting. The quality is poor. What has
happened? Has this group broken away? Is there a plan behind it? Why divide
their forces?  
DALEK 1: The figures are coming through on the radiation treatment.  
DALEK 2: Discontinue laser scope.  
DALEK 1: There is an improvement. Except for one serious case, all Daleks in
section two have shown signs of recovery.  
DALEK 2: Then our position is clear. For us, the drug is a poison.  
DALEK 1: And radiation is still necessary to us.  
DALEK 2: Essential. I want a complete survey of our stock of nuclear
materials. I want an estimate of the amount of waste matter from the nuclear
reactors.

**[Swamp]**

ANTODUS: We'll never get through.  
GANATUS: Yes, we will.  
ANTODUS: What makes you think it'll be any different to the first time.  
GANATUS: At least we know what to expect.  
ANTODUS: But the others don't.  
GANATUS: We promised Alydon we'd find a way through the mountains, and that's
what we're going to do.  
ANTODUS: You'd never get the others to follow you if you told them what
happened the first time. It's your duty to tell them. How we watched Amezus
dragged beneath the waters of the lake, while you and I ran in terror when  
GANATUS: That's enough. We're going on, Antodus. You keep your fears to
yourself. I don't want you upsetting the others. Is that clear?  
ANTODUS: Yes.  
GANATUS: Well, is it?  
ANTODUS: Yes!  
(Antodus moves on, Ian arrives)  
GANATUS: Well, this is the swamp. From now on it's going to be rather
uncomfortable.  
IAN: Yes, I see what you mean.  
GANATUS: The ground's very uneven. Sometimes rock, sometimes thick mud. You'll
have to watch how you walk. I think it'll be a wise plan to find a place to
rest for the night.  
IAN: Yes. We've made very good time. It's only taken four hours to get here
from the edge of the forest. That leaves us with two and a half days to go
through the mountains to the city.  
GANATUS: If there is a way through.  
IAN: We'll find a way. I'll go and give Barbara a hand.  
GANATUS: I'm surprised you let her come.  
IAN: I'd be more surprised if I could have stopped her. How are you doing?  
(Barbara is wearing a pair of the Thal's leather trousers with cut outs on the
outside of the legs, and sandals)  
BARBARA: Fine. Oh, I'm glad the mountaineering's over.  
IAN: There'll be some more once we get through this little lot.  
BARBARA: We're going through there?  
IAN: Well, we must. We've got a deadline with the Doctor in two and a half
days, and we've got to make it.  
BARBARA: Well I think we could all do with a rest.  
IAN: No, we'll keep up with the others. They'll be breaking camp soon. Now
take care. Watch where you put your feet. All right?  
(A little further on)  
GANATUS: This looks like a fairly dry section.  
IAN: Yes, this'll do.  
GANATUS: Right, we'll make camp here. See if we can gather up some dry
branches.  
IAN: All right.  
GANATUS: It'll make it more comfortable to sleep on. Barbara, you see to the
food. I'll get the fire going.  
BARBARA: Right.  
GANATUS: At least it might stop some of these, these things from bothering us.  
(As they settle down for their meal, the swamp gets very noisy. Ian washes his
face in the water. Something with glowing eyes rises up in front of him and he
runs back to the camp)  
BARBARA: What was it? Did you see anything?  
IAN: Yes, it was a  
GANATUS: Kristas, stand guard here, will you?  
KRISTAS: Right.  
GANATUS: We'll take the first watch between us.  
IAN: I'm all right, really.  
GANATUS: Yes, I know, but I think you two Earth people should get as much
sleep as possible. We're more used to this kind of life. It's over a year
since we left our own plateau in search of a new source of food. I'd almost
forgotten what it was like to stay in one place and enjoy it. I suppose
there'll be an end to it one day.  
(Next morning)  
GANATUS: Time to move, my friend.  
IAN: You let me sleep.  
GANATUS: Yes.  
IAN: Why didn't you wake me?  
ELYON: Ganatus.  
GANATUS: What's the matter?  
ELYON: Come and see what I found by the lake.  
GANATUS: Right.  
IAN: Hold on. I'll come with you. Morning.  
BARBARA: Morning. Oh, for a feather pillow and a spring mattress.  
(By the lake)  
GANATUS: What did you see?  
ELYON: Over there.  
(Pipes running from the rocks into the lake)  
IAN: We were right. The Daleks do get their water from the lake.  
GANATUS: But how would it get to the city from there?  
IAN: Well, there must be a way. I mean, the Daleks aren't very mobile. They
must have cut a pathway through there to work on the pipeline.  
GANATUS: How long do you think it will take us to reach there?  
ELYON: Most of today. If we could cross the lake we could reach it much
quicker.  
IAN: I'm sorry, that's one way I'm not going.  
ELYON: Well, it would be dangerous, certainly. The lake is full of mutations.  
GANATUS: No, we must go round.  
IAN: Yes, and we ought to try and get there before the sun goes down.  
ELYON: Well I'll just go and fill the water bags. (a little away from Ian)
There's no point in trying to cross the lake, you think?  
GANATUS: No. No, he's right. Anyway, think how long it would take to build a
light raft.  
(Back at the camp)  
IAN: Barbara, we saw some pipes going into the lake.  
BARBARA: So we can go through?  
IAN: Maybe. With a bit of luck, eh? Thanks. (for the hot drink) Mmm. Good.  
BARBARA: Where's Elyon?  
GANATUS: He's gone to fill the water bags. He won't be long.  
(We see a maelstrom open up in the lake, and then everyone hears a scream)  
GANATUS: Stay here.

__**Episode Six - The Ordeal**__

(At the lakeside, the water bags are floating and the maelstrom is
diminishing)  
ANTODUS: What is it? What's happened to Elyon?  
IAN: There's nothing we can do here.  
BARBARA: Ian?  
ANTODUS: Did Elyon fall in? What happened?  
GANATUS: It must have happened very quickly. Come on now. We must reach the
cliffs by tonight.

**[Forest edge]**

(Susan is using the binocular glasses to look at the city. Dyoni updates the
map with information. They are trying to hide behind a rock)  
SUSAN: There are four roads that lead off from the main square, going north,
south, east and west.  
ALYDON: The main ventilators seem to be over in this section.  
DOCTOR: Hmm.  
SUSAN: Oh, that's wrong. It goes down there and up.  
DOCTOR: Can you see any way in at all?  
ALYDON: No.  
DOCTOR: Oh, you'll allow me, will you?  
(The Doctor takes the glasses)  
SUSAN: Grandfather, get down.  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, yes. Now, the things we have to put out of action is the
radio and television waves. They've obviously got complete coverage in and
around the city.  
ALYDON: They don't leave much to chance.  
DOCTOR: We must presume they don't leave anything to chance.  
DYONI: If they have pictures of the entrance to the city, how can we do
anything?  
DOCTOR: Then we must stop the pictures. Remember, the Daleks aren't very
mobile.  
SUSAN: Yes, we do have speed on our side.  
DOCTOR: And there's always value in surprise. I know it looks difficult, but
we must try it, my friends. Yes, we must.  
ALYDON: Yes. I wish I knew what they were planning for us.

**[Control room]**

DALEK 2: The report for the neutron bomb is prepared.  
DALEK 1: Let us hear it.  
DALEK [OC]: Report on neutron bomb to cover five hundred square miles. Time to
construct, twenty three days.  
DALEK 1: Is that the shortest possible time?  
DALEK [OC]: Yes.  
DALEK 1: Very well. It is too long.  
DALEK 2: We must abandon the idea of a neutron bomb.  
DALEK 1: We must find another way of spreading radiation.

**[Cave]**

GANATUS: It's getting narrower.  
BARBARA: Oh, it's like all the other caves. Just tails off into a dead end.  
GANATUS: There's a gloomy thought for you.  
BARBARA: I wonder if Ian's doing any better?  
GANATUS: When did we arrange to meet him and the others?  
BARBARA: Oh, we ought to be going back now.  
GANATUS: Let's make sure this is impossible first. I must have had sixth
sense. Look at that. Pity. Well, let's go back and try one of the other ways.  
BARBARA: No, wait a minute.  
GANATUS: Can you see something?  
BARBARA: No, stand still for a minute. There, can you hear it? The sound of
water.  
GANATUS: Yes. Barbara, look! There's a passageway here.  
BARBARA: Well, that won't be easy.  
GANATUS: It's a good job we haven't been over-eating recently. It's going to
be a long crawl. Well, we won't use one of the customs of your planet.  
BARBARA: And what's that?  
GANATUS: Ladies first.  
BARBARA: I should hope not.  
GANATUS: Pay the rope out as I move in, will you?  
BARBARA: Yes, all right. But be careful. Remember what Ian said. We're not to
take any chances.  
GANATUS: Do you always do what Ian says?  
BARBARA: No, I don't.  
GANATUS: Well, let me have the torch then. Unless you think you  
BARBARA: No, no. Your need is greater than mine.  
(Ganatus crawls into the opening)  
GANATUS [OC]: Barbara?  
BARBARA: Yes?  
GANATUS: There seems to be a drop of about thirty feet or so. I'm going down.  
BARBARA: Well, be careful.  
GANATUS [OC]: Tie your end of the rope around a rock or something, will you?  
BARBARA: Yes, all right. (she uses a boulder by her feet) Ready.  
GANATUS [OC]: Right.  
(But as the rope plays out, the boulder drags and her foot gets thrown off the
rope. Ganatus falls)  
BARBARA: Ganatus? Ganatus!  
IAN: What's happened?  
BARBARA: I couldn't hold onto it.  
IAN: Where's Ganatus?  
BARBARA: It slipped through my fingers. He's down here, look.  
GANATUS: (bottom of shaft) Barbara?  
IAN [OC]: All right this end. Are you hurt?  
GANATUS: No, I'm not.  
ANTODUS: Is my brother hurt?  
BARBARA: No, he isn't, but it was my fault. The rope slipped off the rock.  
IAN: The rope, Antodus.  
GANATUS: Barbara?  
IAN: Are you sure you're all right?  
GANATUS: Yes. What happened to Barbara?  
IAN: She's okay. Don't worry. Hang on a minute. I'm bringing another rope down
to you.

**[Cavern]**

GANATUS: It would be better if you came down here. There's a big cavern with
lots of tunnels going off it. Unless you've found anything else, this seems a
fair chance.  
IAN [OC]: No, we haven't. Hang on, we'll be with you in a couple of minutes.  
GANATUS: Good. It looks as though it may have been a lucky fall.

**[Control room]**

DALEK [OC]: Rangerscopes are recording great activity amongst the Thal people.  
DALEK 1: Are there pictures?  
DALEK [OC]: No, reception is bad.  
DALEK 1: They are attacking our instruments.  
DALEK 2: We must keep alert.  
DALEK 1: Yes. Concentrate all power of rangerscopes and vibrascopes on all
entrances to the city.  
(The Thals are using metal to reflect the sunlight back to the city)

**[City wall]**

DOCTOR: It looks as if my plan has worked.  
ALYDON: We can't keep up this light reflection for long.  
DOCTOR: Never mind. It gives us a better chance to get into the city
unnoticed.  
SUSAN: We can't be sure of that, Grandfather.  
DOCTOR: Oh, I know it's risky, but, well, we mustn't diddle about here. Now, I
want to get to the east side of that antennae.  
ALYDON: Doctor, look.  
DOCTOR: Hmm?  
ALYDON: According to the map, we should be moving further to our left, in that
direction.  
SUSAN: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, I see. Well you go ahead, will you? Go along, child. Yes,
we'll show them a thing or two.

**[Cavern ledge]**

IAN: So far, so good. It seems to be broadening out a bit.  
GANATUS: Who knows, it may stop being impossible.  
BARBARA: Just become unbearable.  
IAN: Well, at least we can breathe in here.  
GANATUS: We seem to be travelling more or less in a straight line.  
IAN: Yes, I think we are.  
KRISTAS: I'll take the fire.  
IAN: Oh, thank you.  
KRISTAS: Shall I lead on then?  
IAN: Yes, I suppose you might as well. We'll have a rest in a minute.  
ANTODUS: Ganatus. I want to go back.  
GANATUS: What for?  
ANTODUS: I can't go on any more.  
GANATUS: You must.  
ANTODUS: No. We're going deeper, deeper all the time. We'll be trapped in the
mountain, I know we will. Please, Ganatus, let me go back.  
GANATUS: You can't.  
ANTODUS: But you don't really need me, not really. I could, well, I could go
back and signal to the others that we've managed to get as far as we have.  
GANATUS: Antodus, we go on together.  
ANTODUS: Why? Why are you making me do all these things? Even if we do get
through, we'll never defeat the Daleks. Ganatus, we're all going to be killed.  
GANATUS: We can't turn back now.  
ANTODUS: The others can't, but we could. Listen, they're going to die anyway.
We could just go back and tell the others that the Daleks killed them.  
GANATUS: What are you talking about? You must go back.  
ANTODUS: I'm not going on.  
GANATUS: You are. You must. (there's a scuffle, and Antodus bangs his head)
Antodus? I'm sorry. Are you hurt? Ian!  
(There is a rock fall behind the group)  
IAN: Is he hurt?  
GANATUS: A rock hit him. It would have hit me, but he pushed me aside. He was
very brave.  
IAN: Well, I hope he hasn't cut his head.  
ANTODUS: I'm all right.  
GANATUS: Ian, we can't go back the way we came. We must go on now.

**[Control room]**

DALEK [OC]: Emergency. Emergency. Reaction on the vibrascopes.  
DALEK 1: Where?  
DALEK [OC]: Section fifteen, city wall.  
DALEK 2: Shall I redirect the rangerscopes?  
DALEK 1: No. If we track them by their vibrations, we can take them by
surprise.

**[City wall]**

(Susan has found a panel on a wall)  
SUSAN: Hey, Grandfather, look.  
DOCTOR: Yes?  
SUSAN: Is this what you want?  
DOCTOR: Ah, yes, a single cable. The whole city is powered by static
electricity.  
ALYDON: Well how do you know that?  
DOCTOR: The single wire, you see. Round here, there, see? And there. That must
be the answer.  
SUSAN: Well it leads up to the antennae.  
ALYDON: Well, it certainly goes in that direction, but I can't see it all.  
SUSAN: I wonder if I can open this box. There aren't any hinges on it. Oh,
that's it. Look, look, it slides up.  
DOCTOR: Ah, good girl. Now, just take it over there. That's it. Now, look out.  
(He breaks the internal glass panel)  
SUSAN: The thing is, how are we going to cut the wire now it's exposed without
getting a terrific shock?  
ALYDON: Look, we can't wait around here too long.  
DOCTOR: No, just a minute. Now, you go and tell your friends to stop flashing
the light on the antennae. Because for all we know, the Daleks might have a
beam to throw on them, paralyse them, kill them.  
ALYDON: But I can't leave you two here.  
DOCTOR: We shall be all right. Now, go along, and tell them to move their
position from time to time. Now hurry, please.  
ALYDON: Very well, then. But don't waste time here. I'll come back for you if
I can.  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, yes, yes. We shall be back before then. Now go. Dear, dear,
dear, that young man gets so agitated. Now, I'll tell you what we'll do. We'll
short-circuit it to another conductor. Let me have the key of the ship, Susan,
will you? The key of the ship, dear.  
SUSAN: Oh, what a good idea. Yes.  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, yes. I can always make another one if necessary.  
SUSAN: Of course.  
(The key is on a chain around her neck. He drops it into the wall panel)  
DOCTOR: Now, the power's running away. That'll teach the Daleks to meddle in
our affairs.  
SUSAN: What about this one?  
(Another small panel with a revolving disc)  
DOCTOR: Well, of course.  
(He breaks the glass, and loops the chain up to connect to the panel)  
DOCTOR: Watch it.  
(A monitor goes out in the control room)  
DOCTOR: Now, we've shorted it, you see. So something must have gone somewhere
else. The extent of the damage, of course, we don't know yet.  
SUSAN: Look, Grandfather, this is marvellous, but they must have a fault
locator somewhere. We must get away from here.  
DOCTOR: But, my dear child, don't you realise what I've done? A few simple
tools  
SUSAN: Yes, but we mustn't waste time.  
DOCTOR: A superior brain.  
SUSAN: We must go now!  
DOCTOR: But, child, look  
(He turns to see a phalanx of Daleks trapping them)

**[Cavern ledge]**

(They have come to a gap in the ledge)  
IAN: Look out. No place for a quiet stroll, is it?  
GANATUS: It looks pretty wide.  
IAN: Yes, and deep. Well, you might as well take a rest while we sort this one
out. No point in going that way, it widens out. There's no foothold at all on
this side. There's a ledge over there, look. About two to three feet, would
you say?  
GANATUS: There seems to be some sort of cleft in the rock face there.  
IAN: Yes, I think you're right. We'll have to get over there.  
GANATUS: How about going down this side on a rope, and trying to climb the
other?  
IAN: Yes, well, see how deep it is. Hold the torch. A pebble.  
(Five seconds until the splash)  
GANATUS: How do we do it?  
IAN: We jump.  
GANATUS: There's not much space to land in.  
IAN: No.  
GANATUS: Ah, well, I'll go  
IAN: I'll. You go and tell them we're going to jump.  
GANATUS: We're going to jump it.  
(Ian ties a rope around his waist)  
IAN: Shine the torch on that ledge. Keep clear of me when I run, and give me
plenty of rope.  
BARBARA: Good luck.  
(He makes it)  
IAN: All right. Ganatus, you come over next and we'll explore that cleft in
the rock.  
GANATUS: Right.  
IAN: Quite firm. I think there's just about enough room for two of us.  
GANATUS: (throws another rope) Take up the slack, will you?  
IAN: Right.  
BARBARA: Good luck.  
GANATUS: Ready?  
IAN: Take a good long run. (he does) Good jump. You should have come first.  
GANATUS: Now, I'll take a look at this cleft. The torch? Pay it out slowly.  
IAN: Right.  
GANATUS: It's all right. There's a handhold just here. (he disappears from
sight) [OC] A little more rope. It goes wider. It seems to be some sort of a
tunnel. I don't need the rope any more. Bring the others over.  
IAN: Right. Rope coming over.

**[Control room]**

(The Doctor and Susan are sitting cross-legged on the floor)  
DALEK 1: You have destroyed our videoscope and one of our lifts.  
DOCTOR: And you in turn killed the Thal leader in your ambush. And you will be
responsible for more deaths unless you help these people.  
DALEK 1: The only interest we have in the Thals is their total extermination.  
SUSAN: What do you mean?  
DALEK 1: Tomorrow the atmosphere will be bombarded by the radiation from our
nuclear reactors.  
SUSAN: Why are you doing this?  
DOCTOR: That's sheer murder.  
DALEK 1: No, extermination.  
DOCTOR: But you must listen to reason. Please, you must.  
DALEK 1: Without radiation, the Dalek race is ended. We need it as you and the
Thals need air.  
ALL: Tomorrow, we will be the masters of planet Skaro.

**[Cavern ledge]**

(Barbara makes her leap into Ian's arms)  
BARBARA: Oh, I thought I wouldn't make it.  
IAN: You did well. Just get your breath back for a minute.  
BARBARA: I'm all right. Ian?  
IAN: Oh, no, not that way. Now stay still. Give me your other hand. You've got
to come back. Now, swing. Now this time, face the rock. And reach round with
that arm. Reach higher. Can you feel?  
BARBARA: I, I can't reach.  
IAN: Higher. Go on.  
BARBARA: Yes.  
IAN: Now, let go of my hand and swing yourself round. Go on. (she disappears
into the cleft) All right?  
BARBARA [OC[: Yes.  
KRISTAS: I'll throw the fire.  
IAN: Right. Rope coming over.  
KRISTAS: Will you go next, Antodus?  
ANTODUS: No, you go on.  
KRISTAS: Very well.  
(Kristas does his leap)  
IAN: You made it look easy. Got the grip?  
KRISTAS: Yes, I'm clear. Rope coming over.  
(Antodus makes no attempt to catch it)  
IAN: Sorry. Bad throw, my fault. Move back from the edge.  
ANTODUS: I can't do it.  
IAN: Move back from the edge and catch this rope. Ready? Coming now. Good.
Now, tie it round yourself. Tight! Now give yourself a good long run and jump.
I'm ready whenever you are.  
(Antodus jumps, but doesn't get a good foot hold and slips back into the
crevasse. Ian is pulled off his feet and is hanging onto a rock for dear life)  
ANTODUS [OC]: Help me! Help me! I can't hold on. I can't hold on!

__**Episode Seven - The Rescue**__

**[Cavern ledge]**

(Ian is losing his grip when Ganatus comes to help)  
GANATUS: I daren't let go with my other hand.  
IAN: Antodus, get a grip on the rock face. Take the weight off the rope.  
ANTODUS: It's too smooth.  
IAN: Stop it, you fool!  
GANATUS: I'm losing you.  
IAN: Sweat on my hands.  
GANATUS: It's no good, Ian.  
IAN: Call the others.  
GANATUS: Kristas! Kristas!  
IAN: Kristas!  
(So Antodus takes the weight off the rope by cutting it, and falling to his
death)  
GANATUS: Antodus.

**[Control room]**

(Susan and the Doctor are fastened hand and foot to the walls. The first lines
of dialogue are overlapping)  
DALEK: What we need for life means death for the Thals.  
DOCTOR: You could live in the city and the others could. But why do you have
to destroy? Can't you use your brains for right?  
DALEK: Only one race can survive.  
DOCTOR: What are you planning?  
DALEK: We wish to escape captivity. Go out and rebuild the planet Skaro. Our
oxygen distributors will be subjected to waste radiation by the ejector
capsule.  
DOCTOR: Nothing can live outside if you do that. Nothing.  
DALEK: Except the Daleks.  
DOCTOR: When do you intend to put this into operation?  
DALEK: Now.  
DOCTOR: This senseless, evil killing.

**[Tunnel]**

KRISTAS: There's been a fall of rock. The way is blocked.  
IAN: Did you look all round it?  
KRISTAS: Yes. There's no way through.  
GANATUS: Then we'll have to go back. We came this far. We've done our best and
more. First Elyon died, and now my brother. For what? Can't you see there
isn't any sense in it anymore.  
BARBARA: We can't give up now.  
GANATUS: What is it that you want us to do?  
IAN: We must go back and find another way.  
GANATUS: Oh, why don't we just give up?  
IAN: Because your brother died, for one thing. He gave us a chance.  
GANATUS: My brother didn't want us to come. He said we'd all die.  
(The fire in the storm lantern starts to fade)  
BARBARA: What's the matter with it?  
KRISTAS: I don't know. Dirt's got into it, I expect. And if we're going back,
we'll have to go back now. We can't cross the chasm without light.  
BARBARA: Well, we still have the torch.  
KRISTAS: That's weak too.  
IAN: Can we use it sparingly? Well, turn it off, Kristas.  
KRISTAS: Right.  
IAN: Wait a minute. There's a light coming in here. Where's it coming from?
Where's the light coming from? Here. Give me a hand.  
BARBARA: Can you see anything?  
GANATUS: What is it?  
(Ian removes a few rocks and sees - )  
IAN: We're through. We must have been travelling under the pipes all the time.
We're through.

**[Forest edge]**

DYONI: Alydon. The antenna hasn't moved for some time.  
ALYDON: No. The Doctor must have succeeded in putting it out of action.  
DYONI: But why haven't they returned?  
ALYDON: The Daleks must have captured them. Now listen, everybody. The way to
the city is clear. Now is the time to attack. We may be farmers, but have we
forgotten how to fight?

**[Control room]**

DALEK 1: Power down to half.  
DALEK 2: Down to half.  
DALEK 1: Seal off nuclear waste disposer.  
DALEK 2: Sealing complete.  
DALEK 1: Begin radiation redirection to distribution capsule.  
SUSAN: Can't we stop them? Can't we do anything?  
DOCTOR: Just a moment. I haven't told you how we came to this planet.  
DALEK 1: It does not matter now.  
DOCTOR: But it does. I have a ship capable of crossing the barriers of space
and time. Surely this would be invaluable to you?  
DALEK 1: A ship? What do you mean?  
DOCTOR: A machine.  
DALEK 1: I do not believe you.  
DOCTOR: But I have.  
SUSAN: It's true. We have.  
DALEK 1: You are not capable of creating such a machine.  
DOCTOR: And you took a part of my ship away from one of my companions. The
young man.  
DALEK 1: What did it look like?  
DOCTOR: A small rod with metal at either end. It belongs to my ship. A fluid
link containing mercury. Examine it for yourselves. You will see it's part of
a complicated machine.  
DALEK 1: Yes, I have it here.  
DOCTOR: What if we show you the ship? Explain it to you. Help you to build
another?  
DALEK 1: A bargain for your lives?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
DALEK 1: Where is this machine?  
DOCTOR: In the petrified forest outside the city.  
DALEK 1: Good. When the neutron operation has been completed, we will find a
way to travel outside the city limits.  
DOCTOR: No.  
DALEK 1: We will examine your machine.  
DOCTOR: No. Not unless you stop what you're doing. Otherwise I won't explain
its secrets to you and its philosophy of movement.  
DALEK 1: Now we know of the machine, we can examine it for ourselves.  
DOCTOR: But you can't operate it without me.  
DALEK 1: Every problem has a solution.  
DALEK [OC]: Vibration locator records movement inside the city wall.  
DALEK 1: Details.  
DALEK [OC]: Disturbance is too great.  
DALEK 1: Alert Daleks in Section one. The Thals are entering the city.  
SUSAN: Grandfather, they're coming.  
DOCTOR: Can they get here in time?

**[Corridor]**

(Ian, Barbara, Ganatus and Kristas are making their way along a metal
corridor)  
IAN: Now where are we?  
BARBARA: I have no idea. I have some experience in these corridors. They all
look alike.  
IAN: Yes, we could go back to the lift, but. Get back!  
(A Dalek on patrol stops to listen to the announcement)  
DALEK [OC]: Alert. The Thals are entering the city. All Daleks in section one
to level one. Immediate. Immediate.  
(It trundles off)  
IAN: Alydon and the Thals must be in the city. We must find the control room.

**[Control room]**

DALEK 2: Interior videoscopes are recording movement on level eight.  
SUSAN: Grandfather, look. Look, they found a way through.  
DALEK 1: All Daleks on level eight. Urgent.  
(Ian smashes the spy camera)  
DALEK 1: The Thals have penetrated to level eight. Immediate action. Immediate
action.  
DALEK 2: How did they get into the city?  
DALEK 3: Capsule ready to go critical.  
DALEK 1: Stand by.  
DALEK 3: Standing by, ready.  
DALEK 1: The last stage of the operation is about to begin.  
DOCTOR: Stop it, please.  
DALEK 1: Nothing can stop the Daleks. Begin countdown. One hundred.  
DALEK 3: Beginning now.

**[Corridor]**

GANATUS: Alydon.  
ALYDON: Ganatus. Have you found the Doctor?  
BARBARA: Well, isn't he with you?  
ALYDON: No, he must have been captured by the Daleks. And Susan.  
IAN: But the Daleks know you and the Thals are in the city.  
ALYDON: We split ourselves into groups, but without the Doctor we didn't know
what to look for.  
IAN: We must find that control room.  
BARBARA: We must find the Doctor and Susan.  
IAN: Barbara, first and foremost we must find the control room and knock it
out.  
ALYDON: And Antodus?  
GANATUS: Yes, he died bravely.  
DALEK [OC]: Daleks go to control room immediately. All Daleks to level ten.  
ALYDON: But this is level nine. We must be near.  
KRISTAS: We've got to go on.  
BARBARA: There's a lift back there. It's only one floor up.  
DALEK [OC]: All Daleks to level ten immediately. Corridor intersections on all
levels other than ten will be sealed now.  
IAN: Get the door, quick! (but it closes) That one.  
ALYDON: You first.  
(Barbara scrambles through)  
BARBARA: There's another one.  
ALYDON: Quickly, Barbara, get to it.  
GANATUS: Barbara!

**[Control room]**

DALEK 3: Fifty two.  
DALEK 2: The Thals are blocking the intersections from sealing on level nine.  
DALEK 3: Fifty one.  
DALEK 1: Increase power. Emergency. Increase power.  
DALEK 3: Forty nine. Forty eight.

**[Corridor]**

(Barbara is caught under a closing door)  
IAN: Quick. Wait a minute, I'll take the strain. Barbara, try and slide
yourself out.  
BARBARA: I can't move.  
GANATUS: (who has also wedged himself under the door) They're pressing down
harder.  
IAN: They're increasing the pressure. Barbara, you must try and roll out. Try
and free yourself.  
KRISTAS: Just get my hands under.  
BARBARA: I'm through.  
IAN: Alydon. Right. You go next.

**[Control room]**

DALEK: Forty six. Forty five. Forty four. Forty three. Forty two.  
(They shoot a young Thal who breaks in)

**[Corridor]**

(Ian is the last to crawl under the door)  
GANATUS: Try, Ian. It's crushing us both. Come on.

**[Control room]**

DALEK: Forty. Thirty nine. Thirty eight. Thirty seven. Thirty six. Thirty
five. Thirty four. Thirty three.  
(Ian is leading his group up the corridor, dodging Daleks as they come)  
DALEK: Thirty two. Thirty one. Thirty. Twenty nine. Twenty eight. Twenty
seven. Twenty six. Twenty five. Twenty four. Twenty three. Twenty two. Twenty
one. Twenty.  
(Ian and Alydon see Susan and the Doctor)  
DALEK: Nineteen. Eighteen. Seventeen.  
(They dash over to the alcove where they are shackled to the wall)  
DALEK: Sixteen. Fifteen. Fourteen.  
(Barbara throws a rock at a Dalek then gets away)  
DALEK: Thirteen.  
DALEK 1: Follow and kill her.  
DALEK: Twelve. Eleven. Ten.  
(The Dalek gets blindfolded and grabbed by the group)  
DALEK 2: Trapped. Help me. Trapped.  
(Ian and Alydon free the Doctor and Susan, and they make a run for it as Thals
pounce the Daleks and get shot for it)  
DALEK: Nine. Eight. Seven. Six. Five. Four.  
DALEK 3: Reinforcements. Overpowered. Reinforcements. Quickly. Quickly.  
(A Dalek gets rammed into a control panel, with satisfactory results)  
DOCTOR: Chesterton, come here.  
IAN: Doctor! Doctor, I think they're dying.  
DALEK 1: Power going.  
DOCTOR: They were about to spread radiation into the air.  
IAN: We've knocked out their source of power, I tell you. Look!  
(And he kicks one across the room)  
SUSAN: Barbara, is he all right?  
BARBARA: Yes. He's very badly hurt, but he's alive.  
DALEK 1: Listen to me.  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
DALEK 1: (very slowly) Stop our power from wasting or it will be the end of
the Daleks.  
DOCTOR: Even if I wanted to, I don't know how.  
ALYDON: It's finished. The final war. Five hundred years of destruction end in
this.  
DOCTOR: No doubt you will have other wars to fight. Chesterton, come along, my
boy. We've got work to do. I want to look at the reactors and see if there's
any radiation leakage.  
IAN: Yes, and get the ship working again, Doctor.  
(holds up the fluid link)  
DOCTOR: Hmm? Oh, yes, yes, yes, of course. Come along. Come along.  
ALYDON: Kristas, you all right? Here, let's get him up to the air. All this
machinery. What good is it to us? None of us knows the first thing about it.  
BARBARA: Well, you must experiment. These Dalek inventions should be of some
use to you.  
SUSAN: The Daleks have developed food by artificial sunlight. You've got
everything you need now.  
GANATUS: Yes. If only there'd been some other way.

**[Thal camp]**

(Alydon is examining a piece of machinery)  
DOCTOR: This is what they call a compensator, my friend.  
ALYDON: Which is?  
DOCTOR: The whole of it. It's useless. Throw it away. Forget it. Unless you
want to live in a shell like our dead friends.  
ALYDON: Where do you get your knowledge, Doctor? You know, there never seems
to have been time to ask, but we don't really know where you come from, or
why.  
DOCTOR: To rebuild a whole new world. How I envy you.  
ALYDON: But you must stay and help us. We could learn from you.  
DOCTOR: Oh, no, no. I'm afraid I'm much too old to be a pioneer. Although I
was once amongst my own people.  
ALYDON: Well then, stay and advise us. Please.  
DOCTOR: No, no, thank you. We're much too far away from home, my granddaughter
and I. Thank you all the same. It's a nice gesture on your part. You know,
this soil is not quite so barren as you think. I've been making tests, and
even you might live to see and hear the birds amongst the trees. You wanted
advice you said. I never give it. Never. But I might just say this to you.
Always search for truth. My truth is in the stars and yours is here.  
DYONI: Won't you rest with us?  
DOCTOR: No, I'm afraid it's out of the question. But I might visit your
grandchildren to find if they've learned the secrets, and if they have, well,
who knows, I might live with them.  
(Susan runs in, wearing a Thal cape)  
SUSAN: Ta-da! Look, Grandfather, isn't it terrific? Thank you, Dyoni.  
IAN: What are you up to, Susan?  
SUSAN: It's a present from Dyoni. Isn't it gorgeous?  
IAN: It's lovely. By the way, Doctor, have you fitted the fluid link?  
DOCTOR: Not yet, but I have it safely here. And there's no need to worry about
mercury, young man.  
IAN: Good. Well, goodbye, Dyoni.  
DYONI Goodbye.  
IAN: Goodbye, Alydon.  
ALYDON: Goodbye, Ian.  
DOCTOR: Come along, my child. I'm hungry.  
SUSAN: Goodbye, Dyoni.  
DYONI: Goodbye.  
SUSAN: Thank you. (hugs Alydon) Goodbye.  
IAN: Goodbye, Ganatus.  
GANATUS: Goodbye, Ian.  
IAN: Barbara.  
BARBARA: Right.  
DOCTOR: Oh, how stupid of me. I very nearly forgot my specimens. Oh, your
hand, sir. (shakes it) Goodbye.  
ALYDON: Goodbye, Doctor.  
BARBARA: Well, Ganatus?  
GANATUS: Well, Barbara. (hands over material) The dress you make from this
won't be suitable for swamps and caverns.  
BARBARA: Well, that's a good thing.  
GANATUS: Yes.  
BARBARA: It's beautiful. Thank you very much. Thank you for everything.  
GANATUS: I wish  
SUSAN [OC]: Barbara, we're waiting.  
(Ganatus kisses Barbara's hand. She kisses him on the lips and goes into the
Tardis)  
ALYDON: Come along, Ganatus.  
DYONI: Don't be sad, Ganatus.  
GANATUS: I won't be. But I don't think I'll ever forget her.  
(The Tardis dematerialises)

**[Tardis]**

(The Doctor is adjusting controls, when suddenly the Tardis judders. Everyone
is knocked off their feet and it goes dark)

_Next episode - The Edge of Destruction._  
  
---  
  
<Back to the episode listing

Doctor Who and related marks are trademarks of BBC . Copyright  1963,
Present. The web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment
purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

