**The Keys Of Marinus**  

Original Airdate: 11 Apr, 1964  

__**Episode One - The Sea Of Death**__

**[Tardis]**

(The Tardis lands on an island dominated by a huge pyramid. Ian is still
wearing a silk Chinese jacket instead of his cardigan)  
IAN: Any radiation, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: No, nothing to speak of. The counter's hardly reading anything. Shall
we take a look?  
BARBARA: Pity you don't have colour television.  
DOCTOR: Oh, but I have.  
BARBARA: Where is it, then?  
DOCTOR: Well, at the moment it's temporarily hors de combat.  
(They look at the scanner)  
BARBARA: Oh, look. That's the sea, isn't it?  
SUSAN: Yes, and sand. Grandfather, I wonder where we are?  
IAN: One thing's sure. We're not at Southend.  
SUSAN: Grandfather, can we go and have a look? Can we?  
DOCTOR: Yes, I don't think, I don't see why not. There's nothing, no danger
about. Come on. Let's go and have a look.  
IAN: No.  
DOCTOR: What?  
IAN: Well, I thought when you switched the scanner on, I thought I saw
something move up there. Oh, probably just a shadow.  
DOCTOR: Well, let's go outside and have a look.

**[Island]**

(Four torpedo-like things glide up to the beach. On closer inspection, they
look like metal fish)  
SUSAN: It is the sea. It's beautiful.  
IAN: Yes, absolutely calm. Not even a ripple.  
BARBARA: It isn't frozen, is it?  
DOCTOR: No, impossible in this temperature. Besides, it's too warm.  
SUSAN: Grandfather, do you think it's safe to go for a swim?  
DOCTOR: Oh, no, no. Not at the moment, child. However inviting that water
looks, we don't know what sort of creatures might be lurking beneath its
surface.  
(They explore the rocks, and don't see the frogman with flippers following
them)  
BARBARA: It's so quiet.  
IAN: Yes, it is. No birds or anything.  
BARBARA: There's nothing growing.  
DOCTOR: I say, what do you make of this, Chesterton? Fascinating.  
IAN: It's glass.  
DOCTOR: Yes, it is, isn't it. Yes. Glass instead of sand, eh? Intriguing,
intriguing, my boy.  
IAN: Do you think the sand turned into glass?  
DOCTOR: Or was the glass put here deliberately, and if so, why, hmm?  
SUSAN: There's a lovely pool over here. If I can't swim, at least I can
paddle.  
BARBARA: (slipping and bumping into her, making her drop a shoe into the pool)
Oh, sorry, Susan.  
SUSAN: Never mind. I'll get it. You going to come in?  
BARBARA: No.  
IAN: No, Susan, don't!  
(He's spotted the shoe dissolving in the water)  
BARBARA: Ian, what is it?  
IAN: Must be some sort of acid.  
BARBARA: But it was so fast. It just seemed to dissolve.  
SUSAN: And I was going to paddle in it.  
BARBARA: It's all right, Susan. It's all right. Look, you've got some more
shoes back at the ship, haven't you? Well, go and put them on. We'll wait here
for you.  
IAN: Here, you'd better take my boots.  
SUSAN: I can't put those on. They're much too big for me.  
BARBARA: Now, come on. It's better than cutting your feet open on this glass.  
SUSAN: All right.  
IAN: There.  
SUSAN: I'm going to fill them up with sand anyway.  
IAN: All right?  
SUSAN: Yes.  
IAN: They'll give you lovely corns, those will.  
BARBARA: Seven league boots, hey?  
(Susan clumps off)  
BARBARA: Ian. This is a tidal pool.  
IAN: Yes, I agree. Rather ties up with the glass beach, doesn't it.  
BARBARA: Then everything out there is acid too. A sea of acid.  
(The frogman tries to get into the Tardis, then hides as Susan returns)  
DOCTOR: Sea of acid. Astonishing. You know, in all my travels I've never come
across anything like this before. However, Susan wasn't harmed, anyway.  
BARBARA: She was a bit frightened of losing her shoes, but she's gone back to
the ship for another pair.  
DOCTOR: Yes, and if you'd had your shoes on, my boy, you could have lent her
hers. You mustn't get sloppy in your habits, you know. Good gracious.  
(He's seen the metal fish on the beach)  
BARBARA: It looks like a glass torpedo.  
IAN: Or a one man submarine. It's certainly designed for going under the
water.  
DOCTOR: Under acid, more likely.  
IAN: Yes. I don't know if it's occurred to you, Doctor, but this means this
place is inhabited.  
DOCTOR: Oh, yes, it has occurred to me. Let's see what it is. Help me get this
top off.  
BARBARA: Doctor!  
DOCTOR: Yes?  
BARBARA: There's another one over here, and there's something inside it.  
(Susan comes out of the Tardis in a fresh pair of pumps, and carrying Ian's
boots, when she notices the imprint of a frogman's flipper in the sand.)  
SUSAN: Grandfather!  
(She goes to follow the trail)  
DOCTOR: See that crack along there? It's where the acid must have seeped in.  
IAN: That's got it.  
(The sub opens)  
IAN: Now, let's have a look at you.  
DOCTOR: Use that, use that.  
IAN: Hmm? Oh, all right. (uses the Doctor's walking stick to pull out a
frogman's suit)  
BARBARA: It's a protective suit!  
DOCTOR: Yes, and whatever it was wore it, is similar to a human being, hmm?  
IAN: Yes, but how did it get out? Seems to be perfectly intact.  
BARBARA: I don't think it did get out. There's a tear in the material here.  
IAN: You mean the acid got in. Poor devil.  
DOCTOR: Yes, well, I think we ought to go back to the ship and try and find
Susan. She should have caught up with us by now. Come along.  
IAN: Look at that fantastic building! (the pyramid)  
DOCTOR: Good! Now perhaps we might learn who it is that uses these strange
ships. Anyway, lets get back to the ship and find Susan. Later, perhaps, a
little visiting, I think.  
IAN: Yes.  
(Susan has already made it to the pyramid, and the frogman is waiting around
the corner with a raised knife. Meanwhile, at the Tardis)  
BARBARA: She isn't inside anywhere.  
DOCTOR: Oh, wretched child. Now where's she got to, I wonder?  
BARBARA: Ian, there are your boots. And there are Susan's footprints in the
sand here.  
DOCTOR: Yes, sand here and glass on the beach. I'm beginning to think that sea
of acid is a defence barrier.  
IAN: Except against glass submarines, eh, Doctor?  
BARBARA: What you mean is that all visitors are unwelcome.  
DOCTOR: Yes, it would seem so.  
IAN: We must find Susan. She may have gone to have a look at that building.  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes.

**[Outside the building]**

(The slab of wall behind the would-be assassin suddenly opens and he falls
inside the building just before Susan rounds the corner)  
IAN: Oh, it's enormous!  
BARBARA: Look at the joins in the blocks, Ian.  
IAN: Yes, no mortar. Must have been built with tremendous accuracy.  
BARBARA: Yes, the Egyptians did the same thing. So did the Indians of Central
and Southern America.  
IAN: A precise distribution of weight, that's the key, isn't it?  
BARBARA: Yes. Marvellous, isn't it?  
DOCTOR: Yes, now before you two get carried away, I think we'd better go and
find Susan, hmm?  
BARBARA: Yes, you're quite right.  
IAN: Well, for a start, let's make a circuit of this place.  
DOCTOR: Excellent. Now I suggest we go different ways and meet back at the
furthermost point, which is probably round the corner there somewhere. Off you
go, off you go now.  
(Susan leans against the wall, it opens under her weight and she screams as
she falls in)  
BARBARA: Did you hear that?  
IAN: Yes, it was Susan. Come on!  
(The Doctor also gets pulled inside just before Barbara and Ian arrive)  
BARBARA: I could have sworn I heard her.  
IAN: We certainly heard something. Can't be sure it was Susan, of course.  
BARBARA: Well, I am sure.  
IAN: Yes, but where's the Doctor? Even if he'd been travelling at half speed,
he should have reached that far corner by now.

**[Corridor]**

(Inside the building, Susan is walking slowly down a corridor towards where
the frogman is hiding, when a person in a robe passes behind her. She turns,
they ignore her, and she continues backwards until the frogman grabs her. She
screams, he lets go and falls to the floor with his own knife in his back. The
robed figure returns)

**[Outside the building]**

BARBARA: Well, Ian, there's only one thing to do. That's another circuit of
the walls.  
IAN [OC]: I've just been all around and I couldn't find a door anywhere.  
BARBARA: Well, I suppose there's every chance she didn't come this way. She's
probably back at the ship waiting for us. I said, she's probably back at the
ship waiting for us. Ian? Ian? Ian!  
(Finally, she leans against the wall too and gets taken inside where we can
see a robed figure)

**[Corridor]**

(Ian has found the dead frogman. Elsewhere, Barbara and the Doctor have found
Susan)  
SUSAN: Dreadful. The wall just seemed to swallow me up, and then this man
grabbed me and the next thing I knew, he fell dead in front of me.  
BARBARA: Man?  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes. From what Susan has described, he was wearing a suit similar
to the one we found on the beach.  
BARBARA: Are these the ones that live here?  
DOCTOR: No, no. The man wearing the monk's habit lives in this building.  
BARBARA: So the men from the glass submarines are intruders, like us.  
DOCTOR: Yes, with one difference, which is puzzling but revealing. They died,
and we're only prisoners.  
BARBARA: Well maybe we're to be killed, too.  
DOCTOR: I shouldn't worry too much about that. That young schoolmaster friend
of yours is very resourceful. Whilst he's free, our chance of rescue is still
good.  
BARBARA: Well, that's just it, Doctor. He isn't free. He was captured before I
was.  
(Ian comes to the rescue of a 'monk' being attacked by another frogman. The
frogman falls through another movable wall panel and down a long way into
water, or rather, acid)  
ARBITAN: Why do you protect me?  
IAN: Are you a prisoner here?  
ARBITAN: In a way. I can never leave here. In a way, this is my home.  
IAN: Where are my friends?  
ARBITAN: Safe. I saw your machine materialise. Until I knew otherwise I had to
treat you as potential enemies. The Voord were trying to penetrate the walls.  
IAN: The Voord?  
ARBITAN: The man you just saved me from was a Voord. It's many years since
their last assault, but now they've returned and if they continue to come
they're bound to succeed eventually.  
IAN: I should have thought this place was impregnable. How many of you defend
it?  
ARBITAN: How many? I am alone. Oh, please, let us release your companions and
then I'll try to explain.  
IAN: Good idea.  
(Their departure is watched by another frogman)

**[Control room]**

DOCTOR: Yes, yes. I want to know more about this planet. Your technology, you
say, reached its peak over two thousand years ago?  
ARBITAN: Yes, and all our knowledge culminated in the manufacture of this. At
the time, it was called the Conscience of Marinus. Marinus, that is the name
of our planet. At first, this machine was simply a judge and jury that was
never wrong, and unfair. And then we added to it, improved on it, made it more
and more sophisticated so that finally it became possible to radiate its power
and influence the minds of men throughout the planet. They no longer had to
decide what was wrong or right. The machine decided for them.  
DOCTOR: I see. And in that case it was possible to eliminate evil from the
minds of men for all time.  
ARBITAN: That is exactly what happened. Marinus was unique in the universe.
Robbery, fear, hate, violence were unknown among us. Yes, yes, for seven
centuries we prospered, and then a man named Yartek found a means of
overcoming the power of the machine. He and his followers, the Voords, were
able to rob, exploit, kill, cheat. Our people could not resist because
violence is alien to them.  
(A Voord is eavesdropping on all this)  
IAN: But surely by this time this machine had become a great danger to you? If
it had fallen into the hands of the Voords, they could have controlled
Marinus. Why didn't you destroy it?  
ARBITAN: We always hoped to find a way of modifying it and making it again
irresistible. So instead of destroying it, we removed the five key
microcircuits.  
IAN: What did you do with them?  
ARBITAN: One of them, I kept. There it is. (points up) The other four were
taken and put in places of safety all over Marinus. Only I know where they
are, and now the time has come when they must be recovered.  
BARBARA: Well why don't you simply make new keys?  
ARBITAN: The keys are very simple, but the microcircuits inside are very
complicated. A permutation of numbers and signals that would take a thousand
years to unravel. And besides, since the keys were hidden, I have worked on
this machine and modified it, so that when they're replaced  
DOCTOR: When they're replaced it would mean that your machine is irresistible
and you can overcome and control the Voords again.  
ARBITAN: Yes.  
IAN: Surely there must be someone you can send for these keys?  
ARBITAN: Through the years all my friends, all my followers, have gone. They
have never returned. Last year I sent my daughter. She has not come back. All
I have now to comfort me is the distant echo of her voice, the imagined sound
of her footsteps. But now your coming's brought new hope. Oh yes, yes, you
must find the keys for me.

**[Outside the Tardis]**

BARBARA: Ian, wait a minute. The Doctor's miles behind. I don't know about
you, but I felt terrible leaving that old man. We seem to be his last hope.  
IAN: Yes, I wish there had been something we could have done for him.  
SUSAN: Oh, come on, Grandfather.  
DOCTOR: I'm coming, child. Don't rush, I'm coming. Well, don't just stand
there, come along, come along. Keeping me waiting.  
(He tries to put the key in the Tardis lock, but something is forming a
barrier a couple of inches away from it)  
DOCTOR: What?  
BARBARA: What is it?  
IAN: Well, it's some sort of invisible barrier. What do you make of it,
Doctor?  
DOCTOR: I don't know. I don't know. There's no substance here. Have a look
round the side, child. Go along.  
BARBARA: It's like an invisible wall.  
DOCTOR: Is it a circular barrier?  
SUSAN: Goes all the way round. Can't see a cause to it.  
DOCTOR: No, of course, there wouldn't be. The molecules would be at their
weakest. Ha! It's fascinating, Chesterton. Yes, I've got it, I've got it. You
know, I think a force barrier has been put up around the ship.  
ARBITAN [OC]: I am sorry you forced me to keep you from your ship, but your
refusal to help me left me no alternative.  
IAN: Arbitan, where are you?  
ARBITAN [OC]: That is not important. If you help me find the keys of Marinus,
I will let you have access to your machine when you have delivered all the
keys to me. If not, you will stay on the island without food or water. The
choice is yours.  
IAN: Choice? What choice?

**[Control room]**

(They are looking at a map)  
IAN: Well, at least we know the rough location of the keys. Now all we have to
do is get them.  
ARBITAN: As soon as you have started your voyage, I will release the
forcefield. Your ship will be available to you when you return.  
BARBARA: If we return.  
DOCTOR: I know we have no choice, but this whole affair is outrageous.
Blackmail, pure and simply blackmail.  
IAN: Oh, Doctor, don't lets go through all that again. Let's just get on with
the job.  
ARBITAN: Perhaps you will bring me news of my daughter. I miss her. Yes, I
miss her.  
DOCTOR: And another thing. If you think I'm going to travel across that acid
sea in one of these primitive submersibles, you're very much mistaken.  
ARBITAN: I wouldn't think of asking you to travel in such an absurd way. No,
I'm going to give you a device which will enable you to move from place to
place.  
DOCTOR: Oh, really.  
ARBITAN: The principle is much the same as that of your ship. Place that
around your wrist, please. You told me about, except this will enable you to
cross space, not time.  
IAN: What, this little thing?  
DOCTOR: Oh don't be ridiculous, my boy. This is a perfectly acceptable method
of travel. Very compact and very neat, sir, if I may say. Yes.  
ARBITAN: They're all programmed to the same destination. You have only to
twist the dial once.  
BARBARA: Like this?  
(Barbara vanishes)  
SUSAN: Barbara!  
IAN: What! What have you done to Barbara?  
ARBITAN: You must not waste time. You must follow, quickly. One final word. If
when you return, you find the Voord have taken this building, do not let them
get the keys. You understand? Destroy them! Now, now, twist the dials.  
(Ian, Susan and the Doctor vanish)  
ARBITAN: For the sake of all my people, I hope you succeed.  
(A Voord sneaks up behind Arbitan and stabs him in the back)

**[Outside a metal door]**

DOCTOR: Oh, how exhilarating.  
SUSAN: Where's Barbara? She should be here now. Barbara? Barbara?  
IAN: It's Barbara's travel dial. Look, there's blood on it!

__**Episode Two - The Velvet Web**__

**[Outside a metal door]**

DOCTOR: Yes, I can't imagine why Barbara left of her own free will.  
SUSAN: No, surely she'd wait for us.  
IAN: Of course she would.  
DOCTOR: It seems there's only one conclusion. What ever it is that's behind
that door must have taken her by force.  
IAN: Let's get inside.  
DOCTOR: No, no, no, no. Don't let us be precipitous.  
IAN: Doctor, there's blood on this strap. That means she's hurt, maybe badly.
We can't argue now. Let's get inside.  
DOCTOR: Very well, but I say I'm sure it's a mistake.

**[Room]**

(They force the doors apart and are met by a bright flashing light, an alarm
and a lot of statues. Then the flashing stops and they get a good look at the
comfortable furniture, urns of plants, and)  
IAN: I don't believe it.  
BARBARA: Ian! Susan! I'm glad you're here.  
(Barbara is dressed Roman style, reclining on a couch and being waited on by
two women)  
SUSAN: Barbara! You're all right!  
BARBARA: Of course I'm all right. In fact I'm better than all right.  
SUSAN: We saw your travel dial. There was blood on it.  
BARBARA: I know. That was silly. I turned the dial and I seemed to be falling
through space. I got frightened and tried to tear it off my wrist. It just
scratched me, see.  
IAN: Well, I must say, quite a nice little place you've got here.  
BARBARA: You haven't seen anything yet. Will you get some food for my friends?  
(The two women bow and leave)  
BARBARA: You may be seated.  
IAN: Your royal highness is most gracious. Perhaps if your majesty will stop
hogging the grapes we can all have some.  
BARBARA: Help yourself.  
IAN: Thanks.  
SUSAN: This is great.  
IAN: Well, what do you think about all this, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Oh, sensuous and decadent, but rather pleasant. I say, is that a
pomegranate?  
IAN: Yes, here you are.  
DOCTOR: Extraordinary.  
IAN: Well, whatever we expected, it certainly wasn't anything like this.  
SUSAN: Oh, those silks. They're gorgeous. I'd love a dress made from one of
these.  
BARBARA: Well, that's what they're here for. They asked me to choose the
materials I wanted for my robe.  
DOCTOR: It's all most remarkable.  
(A gong sounds and four young women enter with trays of food)  
BARBARA: Oh, it's magnificent.  
IAN: It certainly is.  
SUSAN: Hey, I'm starving.  
BARBARA: What's the matter? Don't you like it?  
IAN: No, I've just realised nobody's shown me the menu.  
SUSAN: They've got everything here.  
DOCTOR: Truffles. I do believe they're truffles. Well, well.  
BARBARA: Go on, Ian. Have one.  
IAN: No. You see, I don't know the price yet.  
BARBARA: But we're guests here.  
IAN: You've met the host, have you?  
BARBARA: Yes, I have, and his manners are perfect.  
DOCTOR: So is his kitchen. Delicious.  
SUSAN: Hey, we've got a visitor.  
IAN: This is where we pay the bill.  
BARBARA: Oh, relax, Ian.  
ALTOS: No, no, don't get up. I apologise for intruding, but I wondered if
there was anything you wanted?  
BARBARA: There is one thing you could do. Tell us about this place, about your
people. Who do we have to thank for all this?  
ALTOS: You are in the city of Morphoton. Our people are perhaps the most
contented in the universe. Nothing they desire is denied them.  
SUSAN: Could I have a dress made  
DOCTOR: Susan.  
ALTOS: No, please, please, let her go on.  
SUSAN: Well, I'd love a dress made from this silk here.  
DOCTOR: Susan, I will not have you take advantage  
ALTOS: She takes no advantage. Truly. Our one wish is to fulfil your every
need. She shall have the dress.  
SUSAN: Thank you. Thank you.  
ALTOS: And you? Have you no wish, no great desire?  
DOCTOR: Well, er, yes, perhaps, but I'm afraid it's not quite as easy as
giving Susan a dress out of that.  
SUSAN: What is it, Grandfather?  
DOCTOR: Well, perhaps, if I had to choose, a well equipped laboratory with
every conceivable instrument. Yes. Yes.  
ALTOS: It will be arranged.  
IAN: It will? You mean he can have it?  
ALTOS: Perhaps in the morning when you see the laboratory, you will find our
way of life easier to understand, to believe. Now, as it is late, I suggest
you sleep. In the morning, when you wake, you will learn everything about
Morphoton.  
DOCTOR: Hmm. Well, we shall look forward to that.  
IAN: Yes, and even if you're not serious about the laboratory, we're very
grateful  
ALTOS: But I am serious. Goodnight.  
BARBARA: Goodnight.  
DOCTOR: Charming young man. Yes, charming. I think a study of this culture is
going to prove very, very fascinating. Oh, dear me. I'm tired, you know.  
BARBARA: I think the excitement's been too much for Susan, too. Come on.  
(Barbara lies the already-sleeping Susan on a couch)  
BARBARA: Well, you don't look very happy.  
IAN: Me? No, no, no, not at all. Well, I think it's all marvellous.  
BARBARA: You're not very convincing. I don't know what you want.  
IAN: Perhaps it's my materialistic side. How rich and powerful do you have to
be to give things away free?  
BARBARA: Oh, now don't spoil it all for me.  
IAN: I didn't mean to do that.  
BARBARA: You can't apply Earth standards. You just can't.  
IAN: No. Certainly very different here. You notice that man's eyes?  
BARBARA: What about them?  
IAN: He didn't blink once. Am I being ridiculous?  
BARBARA: Yes. They're just kind, hospitable people.  
IAN: Yes.  
BARBARA: Try to get some sleep. You'll feel differently in the morning.  
IAN: I suppose it could be worse.  
(Once they have all laid down and closed their eyes, the eyes on a carving in
the wall light up. A woman enters through a secret door and places a device on
each of their foreheads, then leaves. But Barbara's head rolls to the side,
the device falls off and she sits up. Lights flash and there is a discordant
sound. Barbara clutches her head in pain, then passes out)  
(Next morning, Susan, Ian and the Doctor are having breakfast)  
IAN: Oh, good morning. Thank you very much.  
(But the serving girl does not reply)  
DOCTOR: Most refreshing.  
IAN: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Look at these exquisite glasses, Chesterton.  
SUSAN: Can I have some more orange juice, please?  
IAN: Why not? Help yourself, there's plenty more.  
DOCTOR: Now, now, child. Don't take it all. We must leave some for Barbara
when she wakes up.  
IAN: Yes, Barbara. She really is having a deep sleep, isn't she?  
DOCTOR: What's the matter, hmm?  
IAN: Oh, this, oh, I don't know. Just a sort of mild irritation on the
forehead. It's nothing at all.  
DOCTOR: No, there's nothing there. I only mentioned it because I have rather a
sore spot here myself.  
SUSAN: Oh, look! Look, Grandfather, it's my dress. Thank you. Thank you. It's
beautiful, look.  
IAN: Yes, it really is very elegant, Susan.  
SUSAN: Can I show Barbara? Can I wake her up?  
IAN: Why not. She can't sleep all the morning.  
SUSAN: Barbara. Barbara. Wake up. Wake up.  
BARBARA: What's happened?  
IAN: What's the matter?  
BARBARA: Well, look. Look around you. Can't you see?  
(From Barbara's viewpoint, the room is dusty and dirty, not elegant and
luxurious any more)  
DOCTOR: I don't think she's properly awake. Susan, get me a glass of that
fruit juice, will you?  
SUSAN: Yes.  
(But instead of a glass goblet, he offers her a china mug)  
DOCTOR: Here, drink this.  
BARBARA: No, it's filthy!  
DOCTOR: Now you've broken it.  
IAN: Barbara, what's got into you?  
BARBARA: Why can't you see?  
DOCTOR: This is going to test our host's patience, you know. It's one of a
set.  
BARBARA: It's just a dirty old mug. And the room, why have they changed it?  
SUSAN: It's the same, Barbara.  
BARBARA: No it isn't. It isn't. And this terrible dress. And the furniture.  
DOCTOR: What's happened to her?  
BARBARA: Why can't you see it?  
IAN: Barbara, Barbara.  
BARBARA: It's all changed!  
IAN: Come on, now, get a hold of yourself.  
SUSAN: Don't be frightened, Barbara.  
BARBARA: Ian, try to see. Please. Try to see the truth.  
SUSAN: Don't be afraid. Look. They brought me my dress.  
(Barbara sees a tatty sack-cloth thing)  
BARBARA: It's dirty. Dirty rags.  
IAN: Barbara, these people are very kind to us. They've given us everything.  
BARBARA: They've given you nothing. I don't know what they've done to you, or
why it hasn't worked on me, but I must find a way to show you. I must, before
it's too late.  
DOCTOR: Ah, here comes Altos. Now perhaps he can convince you.  
BARBARA: He knows it's failed on me.  
ALTOS: What's the matter? Aren't you feeling well? Let me take you to our
physicians.  
BARBARA: No. No.  
ALTOS: Please, I only want to help you.  
BARBARA: No!  
(Barbara runs out of the room)  
IAN: Barbara!  
ALTOS: Please, don't concern yourself. She's overwrought. I'll deal with it.
You stay here.  
(Barbara manages to hide from Altos in another room, but when she tries the
door again, she can't get back out)

**[Morpho's room]**

(On a table, in a pair of glass cases, are things that look like brains with
eyes on stalks sticking out of the top on them)  
ALTOS: One of the women has resisted the power of the mesmerant. She has
escaped into the city.  
MORPHO: Who placed the discs?  
ALTOS: The girl Sabetha.  
MORPHO: She has failed us and must be punished. Return now to the other three.
Reassure them about their friend. Take them to their laboratory. In four hours
we will give them the final exposure to the mesmerant. They will be completely
subjugated.  
ALTOS: And what of the one that has escaped?  
MORPHO: She has seen the truth, and is beyond our control. Find her and
destroy her.

**[Cell]**

(Barbara hides again when she hears someone coming through the door. Then she
sees who it is)  
BARBARA: You're the girl who put the discs on our foreheads.  
SABETHA: I made a mistake. I am to be punished.  
BARBARA: Tell me all you can about this place.  
SABETHA: I am to be punished.  
BARBARA: Listen to me. I believe you're under some deep form of deep hypnosis.  
SABETHA: I am to be punished.  
BARBARA: Oh, what's the use?

**[Outside the laboratory]**

ALTOS: The physician says she was in a highly nervous condition. She is now
under deep sedation. She will soon recover.  
IAN: Well, that's a relief. Perhaps we can visit her later?  
ALTOS: Yes, of course.  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, well, naturally we're all glad that she's going to be all
right, so if there's nothing more we can do for her, I suggest we get a look
at the laboratory, hmm?  
(Altos opens the door and they go in)

**[Laboratory]**

(It's really an empty room, but Ian and Doctor are under the influence of
Morpho, remember)  
IAN: I've never seen anything like it!  
DOCTOR: I think I shall find considerable scope here.  
IAN: Doctor, isn't that a cyclotron?  
DOCTOR: What? Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes. A simple toy. I'm sure that will amuse
you. Ah, now this might be helpful.  
(he picks up a battered mug)  
DOCTOR: Yes, if I can have instruments like these, I might be able to overcome
the fault in the time mechanism aboard the ship.  
IAN: They really can do it, eh? They can give you anything you ask for.

**[Cell]**

(Sabetha is stroking a medallion)  
BARBARA: Where did you get this?  
SABETHA: It's mine.  
BARBARA: I don't want to take it away from you. I just want to know where you
got it.  
SABETHA: They gave it to me. My masters. It was the thing I desired most. It's
mine.  
BARBARA: But why? Why did you want it?  
SABETHA: It's mine.  
BARBARA: Listen to me. Does the name Arbitan mean anything to you? Arbitan?  
SABETHA: Arbitan?  
BARBARA: Oh, please, please try to remember.  
SABETHA: Arbitan. He sent me here. I was. I can't remember.  
BARBARA: Is Arbitan your father?

**[Morpho's room]**

MORPHO: Open the panel. They're sleeping soundly. Altos is placing the Somnar
discs. Already I sense their will beginning to weaken, memories fading. When
they wake, all resistance will have ended. They will remember no more.  
ALTOS: What are your orders for them when they have recovered?  
MORPHO: The two men will join the working parties. We can use the younger
one's strength with the haulage gangs. The old man is weaker, but intelligent.
Isolate him and put him to work on the scheme for increasing my powers. As for
the child, she must be trained rapidly. She will take the place of Sabetha,
the one that failed us.  
ALTOS: And what of the one that has escaped?  
MORPHO: That is your responsibility. As soon as it is light, a thorough search
must be made. If you fail, you will be killed. She must be found.

**[Cell]**

BARBARA: Concentrate, Sabitha, please. Look, we're almost finished.  
SABETHA: I can't remember any more. I feel so sleepy.  
(Barbara hears footsteps, and hides. Altos enters and goes to Sabetha)  
ALTOS: You are to come with me.  
(He turns and sees Barbara. They struggle. Sabetha hits him over the head with
a pot)  
BARBARA: Sabetha, I must find the others and try and convince them. If I
succeed, I'll come back for you.

**[Corridor]**

BARBARA: Ian! Oh, thank heaven I've found you. Oh, I thought they must have
got to you. I thought. Ian?  
IAN: You must be the one who escaped. The one they told me about.  
BARBARA: Ian!  
IAN: I must take you to them.

**[Morpho's room]**

MORPHO: So, she has been caught. You have done well and proved yourself
worthy.  
BARBARA: It's disgusting. Ian, can't you see how you're being used?  
MORPHO: We are the masters of this place. Our brains out-grew our bodies. It
is our intelligence that has created this whole city, but we need the help of
the human body to feed us and to carry out our orders.  
BARBARA: You use your people to act as machines for you.  
MORPHO: Much more than machines. The human body is the most flexible
instrument in the world. No single mechanical device could reproduce its
mobility and dexterity.  
BARBARA: So I'm to become one of your slaves?  
MORPHO: No. You have seen the truth of our city. It is beyond our power to
erase this from your memory. You must be destroyed. Kill her. Kill her.  
(Ian puts his hands around Barbara's throat)  
BARBARA: Ian.  
MORPHO: Kill her. Kill her. Kill her.  
(Barbara breaks free and starts smashing the place up)  
MORPHO: Kill her! Kill her! Argh!  
(She gets to the bell jars with the brains, and the things inside them die)  
IAN: Oh, oh, where are we? Barbara! Barbara.  
BARBARA: It's all right, Ian. It's all right now.

**[Room]**

(Barbara is out of the tatty dress and in her jumper and slacks again)  
BARBARA: They're burning the city!  
IAN: Yes. I don't blame them. Trouble is, they'll be up here soon.  
DOCTOR: Seeking their revenge, are they? Poor creatures.  
BARBARA: Ian thinks we should get out of here as soon as possible.  
IAN: Yes, I do.  
BARBARA: Where's Susan?  
DOCTOR: We're all meeting here. She's bringing Sabetha and that young man
Altos. I questioned him and there's no doubt about it. He's one of Arbitan's
couriers.  
IAN: They're coming with us?  
DOCTOR: Yes. He's going with you, certainly. By the way, I found these travel
dials. Those repellant brain things didn't appreciate their significance,
fortunately.  
BARBARA: Doctor, what did you mean, Altos is going with you?  
DOCTOR: I will explain it all in good time. Ah, here are the others.  
IAN: Good. Let's go, then.  
DOCTOR: No, wait. Now, we have one key and there are three more to find.  
SUSAN: Yes. Sabetha wanted to continue the search with us.  
ALTOS: I wish to join you, too.  
DOCTOR: Good idea.  
ALTOS: I was sent by Arbitan. I and a friend called Eprin. Our plan was as
follows. He would go ahead in search of key four, and I would come here for
the first.  
IAN: Arbitan hadn't heard from either of you. Or anyone else, for that matter.  
DOCTOR: Well, we must presume something has happened to your friend Eprin.  
ALTOS: It may just be that he couldn't reach the key. It lies somewhere in the
city of Millenius.  
DOCTOR: Ah, yes, the place you mentioned, yes. The highly civilised society.
Now then, I've decided to adopt his plan.  
IAN: What? You mean go two jumps ahead and try and find the fourth key?  
DOCTOR: Yes, precisely. I shall try and find out what's happened to your
friend Eprin. If he's alive, make contact, then we can all meet again.  
SUSAN: Do you know how to adjust the dial, Grandfather?  
DOCTOR: Yes, Altos has shown me how to adjust mine.  
SUSAN: Yours? Well, aren't I coming?  
DOCTOR: No. I think it better if you travel with the main party, child.  
SUSAN: But I want to go with you!  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, I know, Susan, but don't you see it's better if we split our
forces. You see, it's a very dangerous situation and the sooner we get on with
it, the better. For my part, I know you'll be well looked after. And as for
me, well, I'm going to a well-ordered society and I think it's the best and
speediest way, really.  
SUSAN: All right. Won't be for long though, will it?  
DOCTOR: No.  
BARBARA: I was wondering if we should fix a time to meet.  
DOCTOR: Say five days.  
IAN: Yes, that's not a bad idea. But you'd better give us another two just in
case of possible delays.  
BARBARA: I hope everything won't be as bad as this place.  
DOCTOR: No, I hope not. Put these on, please.  
IAN: Well, goodbye Doctor, and take care of yourself.  
DOCTOR: Oh, of course I will. And you see that you take good care of Susan.  
BARBARA: Yes, we will.  
ALTOS: Well, I'm ready.  
SABETHA: So am I. I wish you well, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Thank you, my dear. Now off you go.  
SUSAN: Goodbye, Grandfather.  
DOCTOR: Goodbye, my child.  
(Susan disappears)  
BARBARA: Susan! She should have waited for us.  
DOCTOR: Now, quickly. You must go and follow her.

**[Jungle]**

(It's a noisy place, and Susan is scared)  
SUSAN: Stop it! Stop it! Go away! Go away!

__**Episode Three - The Screaming Jungle**__

**[Ruins]**

BARBARA: Susan.  
SUSAN: Oh, go back!  
BARBARA: What is it?  
SUSAN: We can't stay here. It's stopped.  
BARBARA: What did you see?  
IAN: What's the matter?  
BARBARA: Susan, answer me.  
SUSAN: Didn't you hear it?  
ALTOS: There could be animals in this jungle around us.  
SUSAN: No, no, it wasn't anything like that.  
IAN: Take it easy, Susan, and try and tell us what it was you heard.  
SUSAN: Well, well, it was horrible.  
BARBARA: She'll tell us in time. Look, Susan, whatever it was, it's gone now.  
SUSAN: I did hear it, you know.  
BARBARA: Yes.  
SABETHA: This is a dead place.  
IAN: Yes, it's very quiet, isn't it.  
SABETHA: That isn't quite what I meant.  
ALTOS: The key must be on the other side of this wall.  
IAN: Yes. Some sort of an archway. Look at these creepers.  
ALTOS: Some of them are almost as thick as small trees.  
SUSAN: And was Grandfather all right?  
BARBARA: Yes.  
SUSAN: I didn't want to stay until the last possible moment. I don't like to
say goodbye.  
BARBARA: No, I know.  
SABETHA: I suppose we could cut them down.  
IAN: Not unless we have to. Take us the best part of a day to hack that little
lot down. The best thing we can do is take a walk round these walls.  
ALTOS: Oh yes, that would be wise. Then we might find another entrance.  
SABETHA: I'll go with you.  
BARBARA: Ian, Susan and I will stay here.  
IAN: All right. We won't be long, anyway.  
BARBARA: We'll look around for some branches and things in case we have to
force our way though that arch.  
IAN: That's a good idea, but don't do anything until we get back, hey?  
BARBARA: All right.  
IAN: Come on, let's try this way.  
BARBARA: I do wish Ian wouldn't treat us like Dresden china.  
SUSAN: I think it's nice the way he looks after us all the time.  
BARBARA: Yes, I know, but just once in a while  
SUSAN: You rebel.  
BARBARA: Yes. How are you feeling now?  
SUSAN: Oh, I'm all right, thank you.  
BARBARA: Susan, what did happen?  
SUSAN: Well, it was a sound. A noise like tapping, and whirring, all mixed up
with a screeching. I've heard it before.  
BARBARA: Where?  
SUSAN: Well that's just it. I can't remember. I just recognise it as being
something evil.  
BARBARA: You know, I've never seen vegetation as dense as this before. It'll
overrun the building in time.  
SUSAN: Do you think the key's inside, Barbara?  
BARBARA: Oh yes, it must be. It's a funny old place, isn't it? You know, in a
few years these walls will be so weak you could push your way through.  
(Meanwhile, a climbing plant is moving on its own toward where Susan is lying
on the ground, relaxing)  
BARBARA: You know, Susan, looking at this archway, I'm not at all sure. It
isn't half as dense as it looks. I'm sure we could get through.  
(The plant has grabbed Susan's ankle. She screams)  
SUSAN: Barbara! Barbara!  
(Barbara gets the plant off Susan and thumps it with a rock)  
SUSAN: It was alive! A snake crawling all over me!  
BARBARA: No, no. It must have fallen on you from the trees.  
SUSAN: It didn't, it didn't. It's alive.  
BARBARA: Now stop it, Susan. Stop it.  
SUSAN: It was trying to twine all round me.  
BARBARA: It was just your imagination.  
SUSAN: I'm sorry.  
BARBARA: It couldn't move by itself. You know it couldn't.  
SUSAN: No.  
BARBARA: Come on over here and help me at the archway. You know, you'll
frighten me if you go on like this.  
SUSAN: Oh look, you can move some of these back quite easily.  
BARBARA: Yes, I thought so.  
(She goes through the archway)  
SUSAN: What is it?  
BARBARA: I'm not sure. It's so dark in here. There's a statue at the end of
the tunnel. An idol or something.  
SUSAN: Be careful, Barbara. Barbara? Barbara? Are you all right?  
(Barbara has reached the idol in it's niche. It has an animal face, sunburst
hair and open arms)  
SUSAN: Oh, please don't go any further!  
BARBARA [OC]: It's all right, I can see it now. It's a big grotesque statue.  
IAN: Oh, there's no other way in, Susan.  
SUSAN: Oh, Ian, thank goodness you're here.  
IAN: What? Where's Barbara?  
SUSAN: She's gone down here.  
IAN: Barbara! What are you doing? I told you to wait until we got back.

**[Statue]**

BARBARA: I thought there was a way through. Ian, look! The key, the
microcircuit, I've found it!  
IAN [OC]: Hang on, I'm coming.  
BARBARA: No, no, it's all right, I can reach it.

**[Ruins]**

ALTOS: What's happening?  
IAN: Barbara's found the micro-key.  
SABETHA: Wonderful.  
ALTOS: Can you manage?

**[Statue]**

BARBARA: Yes, yes, I think I've got it.  
(She climbs up the statue and triggers some mechanism. The statue's arms close
around her legs)  
BARBARA: Ian! Help me! Help me!  
(The men dash in through the archway but the statue pivots round and when they
get there it is just a blank wall)  
IAN: You see what happened?  
ALTOS: Yes. Is there no break in the wall? Perhaps there's a hidden spring.  
IAN: Well if there is, I can't find it.  
ALTOS: Well we must get inside.  
IAN: Yes, but how? Oh, let's get out in the open. I can't think in here.  
(Altos finds the micro-key on the floor)

**[Ruins]**

IAN: Barbara's disappeared. That idol thing was on some sort of a pivot.  
ALTOS: At least she found the micro-key.  
IAN: Oh, I don't care about that now. The only thing that matters is getting
Barbara out of there.  
ALTOS: Yes, I agree. Here, Sabetha, you'd better take this. Keep it with the
other, and keep it safe.  
SABETHA: Thank you. Look, I don't want to raise false hopes, but perhaps
things aren't as bad as they seem.  
IAN: What do you mean?  
SABETHA: Well, Barbara was wearing her travel dial, wasn't she?  
SUSAN: Yes. None of us have taken them off.  
SABETHA: Then as long as she wasn't injured when she was trapped, she can
escape whenever she wants.  
IAN: It's a possibility.  
ALTOS: Well, I'm sure she would have thought of that.  
IAN: Yes, of course. She may not have taken advantage of it yet. Anything
might have happened to her.  
SABETHA: But if she was in danger, she'd have to use her travel dial.  
(They hear the mechanism)  
SUSAN: It's turning again. Now the arms are open.  
ALTOS: That means it either must have released her or she's escaped.  
IAN: She may have been injured, or even  
SABETHA: But if she used her travel dial, and gone on to the next destination,
we don't know what danger she may be in there.  
IAN: No. Well, we must cover all possibilities to the best of our abilities.
You'd better go on ahead with Susan and Altos.  
ALTOS: Yes, that's wise. I think that is the wisest course.  
SUSAN: Ian, what are you going to do?  
IAN: I'm going back in there. If that idol works once as a trap, there's no
reason why it shouldn't work again. Once inside, well, if there's no sign of
Barbara, I'll follow you as quickly as I can.  
ALTOS: Well, if that's settled, there's no point in delaying. You ready,
Sabetha? Susan?  
SUSAN: Can't I come with you, Ian?  
IAN: No, Susan. Better not.  
SABETHA: We'll wait for you, Ian.  
ALTOS: And I'll be your guardian, Susan.  
IAN: Look after her, Altos.  
ALTOS: Take care, my friend.  
SUSAN: Goodbye, Ian.  
IAN: Good luck. (Altos and Susan vanish. Sabetha has dropped the micro-key)
Here, you'd better put this on your chain with the other one. We don't want
you losing it somewhere in outer space.  
SABETHA: That would be terrible. There. I think that's safe enough. This isn't
it.  
IAN: What?  
SABETHA: It's just an imitation. Look, Ian. This edge is a fraction shorter.  
IAN: Are you absolutely sure? I mean, isn't it possible there was some genuine
variation in the original micro-keys?  
SABETHA: No, they all look absolutely identical, so this one must be an
imitation.  
IAN: We're no further on than when we arrived here.  
SABETHA: Do you want me to stay with you?  
IAN: No. You go on ahead with the others. They'll be worried already. Tell
them what happened, and tell them I'll follow as soon as I find the real
micro-key.  
SABETHA: Please be careful.  
IAN: I will. Off you go.  
(He goes to the statue, it holds him and turns around)

**[Courtyard]**

(There are plenty of statues and plants here. Ian steps on a loose paver and
an axeman starts working)  
BARBARA: Ian, behind you!  
(Ian gets out of the way of the axe)  
BARBARA: You're not hurt?  
IAN: No, just a bit shaken. Barbara, if you hadn't shouted  
BARBARA: Never mind about that now. Ian, I've been so frightened. If you
hadn't turned up in another half an hour I was going to turn the travel dial.  
IAN: I'm glad you didn't. That micro-key you found, it was a fake.  
BARBARA: What?  
IAN: Yes. The real one must be in here somewhere.  
BARBARA: And I warn you it's not going to be easy to find.  
IAN: No?  
BARBARA: This whole place is one big booby-trap. It's full of things like that
statue. I'd only been here a minute when part of the wall crashed down just
where I'd been standing.  
IAN: We'll take it very slowly. That doorway looks a good place to start. Any
idea where it leads to?  
BARBARA: No. Into the building, I suppose.  
IAN: Well, that's a likely place to hide a key. Come on.  
BARBARA: These vines are everywhere. They seem to be crawling all over the
building.  
IAN: Not only the vines. It's all vegetation. Look at that wall.  
BARBARA: It seems to be trying to get in.  
IAN: Let's get the micro-key and get out of here. It looks as if we're going
to have to break this door down. It's pretty solid. I shall need something to.
I wish I could.  
BARBARA: I saw some iron bars in an alcove down there.  
(an old man apparently opens the door)  
BARBARA: Ian. Ian!  
IAN: I'll be right with you.  
(Barbara goes inside and a net drops on her from the ceiling. She sees the
ceiling has knives sticking out of it, and it is descending towards her. She
screams)  
(Ian tugs at an iron bar, but it has a chain attached to it and he gets
trapped behind an iron grating)  
BARBARA [OC]: Ian! Ian!  
(He tries to use another bar to prise the grating open)

**[Ante-chamber]**

BARBARA: Help me, Ian. Help me!  
(the old man reverses the mechanism)  
DARRIUS: Why have you come in search of the keys?  
BARBARA: Help me.  
DARRIUS: Who are you? What interest have you in the keys?  
BARBARA: Look, I can't talk to you like this. Let me go.  
DARRIUS: Are you a Voord? You do not resemble their race and yet  
BARBARA: Arbitan sent us.  
DARRIUS: That is a lie.  
BARBARA: No, it's true. He was alone on the island. He couldn't send anyone
else.  
DARRIUS: How can you prove it?  
BARBARA: I don't know. Look, where's Ian? What have you done to him?  
DARRIUS: How can you prove that Arbitan sent you.  
BARBARA: Oh, the travel dial on my wrist.  
DARRIUS: I will examine this, and if it is set correctly with the proper
journey programme I shall know that you speak the truth. Only Arbitan could
set your complete journey.  
BARBARA: What have you done with Ian?  
(But the man leaves her. Ian is still trying to get through his bars, and
succeeds. The man meanwhile has got caught by a vine and is being throttled)

**[Room]**

DARRIUS: Help me! Help me!

**[Ante-chamber]**

IAN: Barbara. Are you all right?  
BARBARA: Yes. In there.  
IAN: What?  
BARBARA: In here. MAN [OC]: Help me!

**[Bed room]**

DARRIUS: Help! Help me.  
(Ian uses a bar or sword to cut him free)  
DARRIUS: It's coming again. The jungle is coming. When the whispering starts,
it's death, I tell you. Death!  
(Later, the old man is in his bed)  
BARBARA: He's coming round, Ian. Ian, I think he's dying.  
DARRIUS: You must not stay here.  
IAN: Listen to me. Where is the micro-key? We're looking for it. Do you
understand? Arbitan sent us.  
DARRIUS: Has Arbitan sent someone at last?  
IAN: Yes.  
DARRIUS: The idol. I put a false key on its head.  
BARBARA: Yes, I found it.  
DARRIUS: I know. A system of mirrors. When the false key was taken I put my
traps in motion. Only those warned by Arbitan could avoid them.  
BARBARA: He's getting weaker, Ian. I wish there was something I could do. I
feel so helpless.  
DARRIUS: I haven't long to live, have I?  
IAN: You must trust us. Tell us, where is the micro-key?  
DARRIUS: Closer. D E 3 O 2.  
IAN: What do you mean? I don't understand.  
DARRIUS: Quickly, the darkness! The whispering will start.  
(He dies)  
BARBARA: He pointed to this door. What did the numbers and the letters mean?  
IAN: I don't know. Could be the combination to a safe. Let's go and see.

**[Living room]**

(Furniture, pot plants)  
BARBARA: Ian, you were right. It is a safe.  
IAN: And a combination one, at that.  
BARBARA: D E 3 O 2.  
IAN: Hello. It's only got the letters on. Perhaps the figures were the numbers
of turns?  
BARBARA: Yes, try it.  
IAN: D E 1 2 3 O 1 2. It doesn't work. Are you sure we got it right?  
BARBARA: Yes, certain.  
IAN: Try again. D E 1 2 3 O 1 2. No, no, it doesn't work. Well, I suppose he
could have hidden the combination somewhere.  
BARBARA: Yes, I suppose so. There's also a possibility that he didn't mean the
safe at all. Judging by the traps and decoys around here, I should think the
obvious hiding place is the least likely.  
IAN: We must go over this room inch by inch. Eliminating everything but the
safe. Then if we haven't found it, it must be in here.  
BARBARA: I'll start over here.  
(Much later)  
BARBARA: Ian, I've been trying to think back. What did he mean, darkness, the
whispering will begin. Whispering? I wonder if that's what Susan heard?  
IAN: I don't know. I think he was rambling, he didn't mean anything. I'm
hoping to find a lead in here. It's a diary of his experiments.  
BARBARA: What was he working on?  
IAN: Biology seems to have been his field as far as I can make out.  
BARBARA: Well, judging by the specimens in here, I'd say he was very
successful.  
IAN: Yes. Last couple of entries are a bit strange. All about the balance of
nature and increased destructive forces. Listen to this. Nature has a fixed
tempo of destruction. Water dripping on a stone may take a thousand years to
produce any sign of wear.  
BARBARA: Well, that's not very original.  
IAN: It is if you could speed up everything. The wear on the stone could
happen in one day.  
BARBARA: But that's ridiculous.  
IAN: Is it? He didn't seem to think so. He ends up by saying, the growth
accelerator has changed nature's tempo of destruction entirely.  
BARBARA: Yes, well that may all be very fascinating, but we are supposed to be
looking for the combination to that safe.  
IAN: All right. All right.  
BARBARA: You know, it's quite dark outside. Have you looked through this one?  
IAN: No.  
(The noises start)  
IAN: What's that?  
BARBARA: I don't know. It sounds like whispering. He said it would begin when
darkness came. That must be what Susan heard.  
IAN: Well, what's causing it?  
BARBARA: Shush. Listen. It's like someone trying to get in.  
IAN: You said that when we were outside, about the jungle.  
BARBARA: But it couldn't, Ian, it couldn't.  
(Tendrils are pushing through the walls)  
IAN: Look! Oh, Barbara, don't you see? It's what he meant. Tempo of
destruction. It would normally take fifty or a hundred years for a jungle to
overrun this place. Now the whole process has been accelerated.  
BARBARA: You mean the jungle is attacking us?  
IAN: Yes.  
(Barbara's ankles get grabbed by a vine, and while he is freeing her, Ian
spots the label on a broken glass jar - NH4NO3)  
IAN: Look, Barbara. It's a chemical formula! DE3O2. The micro-key's in one of
these jars. Come on! Quickly, find it.  
(She does)  
BARBARA: Ian, the key!  
IAN: Barbara, you've found it! Let's get out of here, quickly. Turn the travel
dial, now! Now!

**[Snowfield]**

BARBARA: Oh, it must be far below zero.  
IAN: Barbara, this wind's going right through me. We must move.  
BARBARA: I can't. I can't move, Ian. I'm too cold.  
IAN: Barbara, you've got to. We must move. If we don't find shelter, we don't
stand a chance.

__**Episode Four - The Snows of Terror**__

**[Snowfield]**

BARBARA: It's no good, Ian. I'm too tired. Sleep.  
IAN: No!  
BARBARA: I must sleep.  
IAN: No. No, Barbara. We'll freeze to death.  
(They both pass out. Barbara wakes briefly to see someone dressed in furs
standing over her. He takes the micro-key from her hand)

**[Vasar's hut]**

(The wind is howling outside, but there's a fire in the grate. The man wakes
Barbara again)  
VASAR: Don't be afraid. You're safe now.  
BARBARA: Oh, how did I? Ian? Where's Ian?  
VASAR: Your friend is here. He still sleeps. Your hand is slightly
frostbitten. Put it in mine. We must help your friend like this too. Rub the
hand slowly, like this. Yes? Understand? Are you afraid of me?  
BARBARA: No.  
VASAR: Last year I broke the back of a wolf with my bare hands. I'm Vasar.
Most men fear me, so I have few visitors. There, see? The blood is beginning
to return.  
BARBARA: Thank you.  
VASAR: I'll get a warm drink for both of you.  
BARBARA: Ian, wake up. How are you feeling?  
IAN: Oh, my hands.  
BARBARA: Yes, they're swollen with frostbite. No, no, no, you mustn't put them
near the fire. You have to bring back the circulation slowly.  
(Barbara strokes his hand)  
IAN: Where are we?  
BARBARA: I don't know. I don't even know how we got here.  
VASAR: Ah, you're awake. Good. Here, drink this.  
IAN: Oh, thank you. Mmm. Oh, that's better. Do we have you to thank for saving
us on the mountain.  
VASAR: I found you when I was resetting my traps. Had a difficult journey
getting you back to the hut.  
BARBARA: We would have frozen to death.  
VASAR: The wolves would have eaten you first.  
IAN: Wolves?  
VASAR: Yes, there are more than ever of them this winter. I've counted a dozen
packs, twenty in each. They're hungry. They're even raiding the villages at
night.  
BARBARA: Are we in a village?  
VASAR: No, the nearest village is three miles away. I stay out here to look
after my traps.  
IAN: Well, we're grateful to you, getting to us before the wolves.  
VASAR: One of you would have died anyway if it hadn't been for the stranger.
Couldn't carry you both.  
BARBARA: Stranger? What stranger?  
VASAR: A madman. Came in here early last night, raving and ranting. I couldn't
talk to him. Gave him some clothes and went with him up the mountain. He was
searching for a couple of girls.  
IAN: Altos!  
BARBARA: Where is he now?  
VASAR: In the village, I think. After we got you back here, I think he went
out.  
BARBARA: Did he say he was coming back?  
VASAR: Yes, but it's getting nearly dark. He won't be able to get over the
ledge at night.  
IAN: We must go and help him.  
VASAR: There's a storm coming up.  
IAN: You've already done so much for us. I can't ask you to risk coming with
me, but will you lend me warm clothing?  
VASAR: Lend you? My furs are my living. I'm a poor man. I wouldn't have much
chance of getting them back if you fall down a crevice.  
IAN: I can't pay you for them. I haven't got any money.  
VASAR: That thing on your wrist looks valuable.  
IAN: Yes, all right. Now please, hurry.  
VASAR: All right, coat and gloves over there. I'll get you a lantern.  
BARBARA: Ian, Susan and Sabetha, do you think you'll find them?  
IAN: I don't know what to think, Barbara. I'll know more when and if I find
Altos.  
VASAR: Here you are. The village lies that way. When you get through the fur
forest you'll see the lights.  
IAN: Well, thank you.  
BARBARA: Ian.  
IAN: I'll be back as soon as I can.  
(Ian leaves, and Vasar bolts the door behind him)  
VASAR: Now, we're alone.  
BARBARA: Oh, he'll be back. I know he will.  
VASAR: We'll see. Well I'll go and get us some food. We must fatten you up,
eh?

**[Snowfield]**

(Ian finds Altos lying in the snow. His hands have been tied together)

**[Vasar's hut]**

(The wolves are howling)  
BARBARA: They sound so close.  
VASAR: You're safe here. That door'll keep anything out. Or in. You clear
those things will you, and I'll get rid of these.  
(Barbara opens a drawer in the table and finds - three travel dials and)  
BARBARA: Sabetha's chain.  
VASAR: What are you doing in that drawer?  
BARBARA: Where did you get these? One of the girls was wearing this.  
VASAR: You give me those. They're worth money.  
BARBARA: How did you get them?  
VASAR: There's a cave on the mountain where I store my traps. I found the two
girls hiding there.  
BARBARA: So they're alive.  
VASAR: They may be. That was yesterday. I gave them food and flint in return
for these, and I left them there.  
BARBARA: But why? Why didn't you bring them back?  
VASAR: Oh, don't keep annoying me. These accusations. I can't afford to look
after every fool that gets lost on the mountains.  
BARBARA: They gave you all those things in the drawer.  
VASAR: Trinkets.  
BARBARA: But what about Altos? The young man, who  
VASAR: He forced me to go up the mountain to look for these girls. Instead we
found you. And when we'd brought you back here he wanted to go out again.  
BARBARA: I don't believe you. You stole those things.  
VASAR: Oh, did I?  
BARBARA: They might have given you the wrist bracelets, but the keys and the
chain? Sabetha would never have parted with them.  
VASAR: Yes, I thought they were valuable.  
BARBARA: What have you done with them? You didn't kill them?  
VASAR: You don't kill anyone in this country. The cold and the wolves do that.  
BARBARA: Well, when Ian gets back  
VASAR: What makes you think he will get back? He doesn't know what's in that
bag I gave him.  
BARBARA: What did you put in it? Tell me!

**[Snowfield]**

(Ian is trying to get Altos' circulation going.)  
IAN: They're getting closer. We can't stay here. How are your legs?  
ALTOS: The feeling's beginning to return. I should be able to walk in a minute
or two.  
IAN: You haven't yet told me who tied you up.  
ALTOS: The trapper.  
IAN: What? But he rescued us.  
ALTOS: Only because I forced him to. He's utterly ruthless.  
IAN: Barbara's back there with him. Alone!  
ALTOS: We must get back there as quickly as we can. Come on, help me up.  
IAN: All right. Can you stand?  
ALTOS: Yes.  
IAN: Just a minute, look at this. Raw meat. What on earth would Vasar want to
give me that for?  
(Wolves howl)  
ALTOS: There's your answer. Those beasts could scent meat a couple of miles
away. Draw them like a magnet. Vasar's making certain you wouldn't get back.  
IAN: Well he's got a surprise coming, hasn't he.  
(Ian throws the bag away)  
IAN: Come on.

**[Vasar's hut]**

VASAR: There's nowhere you can run.  
BARBARA: Keep away.  
(She picks up the poker)  
VASAR: Put that down.  
BARBARA: Don't you dare come near me.  
VASAR: All right, I'm in no hurry. There's no one coming to help you. I can
wait.

**[Snowfield]**

IAN: They're catching up.  
ALTOS: Look!  
IAN: About a quarter of a mile, I make it. I think we've got a chance, but
we'll have to run, Altos.  
ALTOS: All right, I'll try. Come on.

**[Vasar's hut]**

(Barbara has had to defend her honour with the poker, and has hurt Vasar)  
VASAR: All right, I'll wait no longer.  
(He chases her around the table, she stumbles and screams, then there's a
hammering at the door. Vasar is immobile with surprise, so Barbara runs to the
door)  
IAN [OC]: Barbara, open the door!  
VASAR: Come back.  
IAN [OC]: Open the door!  
(Barbara bites Vasar's hand and pulls back the bolts)  
IAN [OC]: Open the door! Open the door!  
(Ian and Altos enter)  
IAN: Are you all right?  
BARBARA: Yes, the girls are all right. They're in a cave in the mountain.  
VASAR: I meant them no harm, I swear it. I gave them food and flint to light a
fire.  
ALTOS: You treacherous  
IAN: No, Altos. We want him unharmed. He's going to show us where the cave is.

**[Cave]**

(Susan is failing to keep the fire going)  
SUSAN: I'm sorry, Sabetha.  
SABETHA: It doesn't matter. There is hardly any wood left.  
SUSAN: Look, there's no point in us waiting here. We must go out there and
take a chance.  
SABETHA: In these clothes? We wouldn't last an hour.  
SUSAN: How long do you think we'll last here without any fire?  
SABETHA: I suppose you're right.  
SUSAN: Come on, then.  
SABETHA: That isn't the way we came in. It was the tunnel on the right.  
SUSAN: Well I'm sure it was this one.  
SABETHA: I could have sworn it. Well, if you're certain.  
SUSAN: I thought I was certain. You've made me doubtful now.  
SABETHA: Come on, let's try it.

**[Snowfield]**

IAN: How much further?  
VASAR: It's just beyond the next ridge. When we get there, can I go back?  
IAN: You're getting no promises out of me. Come on.

**[Tunnel]**

(The girls have come to a dead end)  
SABETHA: Now we've got to go back.  
SUSAN: I'm sorry, Sabetha.  
SABETHA: It's not your fault. Don't worry, we'll just go back the way we came.
Come on.

**[Cave]**

IAN: They're not here.  
VASAR: Look, there's been a fire. I told you I helped them.  
IAN: This ash is still warm. They can't have been gone long.  
BARBARA: Is there another way out of these caves?  
VASAR: No, this is the only one.  
ALTOS: How far do these tunnels go?  
VASAR: Oh, right through the mountain.  
IAN: Then they must have gone in deeper. Lead on, Vasar.  
VASAR: No! No! No! We mustn't! There are demons in there. I won't go on.  
IAN: I am not asking you, I'm telling you. Now, move!

**[Bridge]**

SUSAN: It's no good, Sabetha. We're just going deeper into the mountain.  
SABETHA: If we keep going, we must find a way out. Now, come on.  
SUSAN: Oh, look. We've got a rope bridge.  
SABETHA: Be careful. Is it safe?  
SUSAN: I think so.  
SABETHA: Don't look down.  
(Susan gets to the other side of the narrow chasm, and Sabetha follows)  
SABETHA: Come on, let's move quickly.

**[Tunnel]**

BARBARA: I've just realised. This wall isn't rock, it's solid ice.  
VASAR: Oh, please, we mustn't go on. I told you the truth when I said there
were demons here. There are men who've seen them.  
IAN: Well, who knows, you might be a man who's seen them too. You're not going
back, anyway. Come on, get on. Go.

**[Bridge]**

(They come to the rope bridge as Susan and Sabetha come to a room with four
knights in armour standing guard around a block of ice. They run back into the
arms of their would-be rescuers)  
SUSAN: Oh, Barbara!  
IAN: Hang on, I'm coming over.  
BARBARA: Ian.  
IAN: Thank you. Oh, Susan. Here, put this round you.  
SUSAN: I though we'd never get out of there.  
IAN: Well, you're all right now. What happened?  
BARBARA: What was it that frightened you?  
SABETHA: Down there. There's somebody down there.  
SUSAN: We almost ran into them.  
ALTOS: Ian, stop him!  
(On the other side of the five foot gap, Vasar is unfastening the rope bridge.
He throws it down.)  
IAN: Vasar, wait.  
VASAR: No, you wait. Wait there forever. There's no other way out.  
(Vasar leaves)  
IAN: What a fool I was.  
BARBARA: How do we get across?  
IAN: I don't know. It's too wide to jump.  
BARBARA: Well, maybe we could find some planks or logs and lay them across.  
IAN: Yes, all right. Let's go and look.  
ALTOS: Shall I lead the way?  
IAN: Yes.

**[Tunnel]**

ALTOS: Sabetha, keep close behind me. Look out for this slope.  
IAN: Yes. Mind the slope. All right? Altos, look out! This rock's the only
thing supporting this block of ice.  
ALTOS: It might have crushed us to death.  
IAN: Yes, well the only thing to do is keep away from it. Keep down as you go
under.  
ALTOS: Yes, I agree.  
IAN: Right down.  
SUSAN: Can't we go back?  
BARBARA: No, Susan, we must find the key.  
IAN: Susan, we must search all these tunnels properly. That key's probably
hidden somewhere here, inside the mountain.  
SUSAN: Not there!  
IAN: We have no alternative.

**[Knight's room]**

BARBARA: Is this what you saw, Susan?  
SUSAN: Yes. But they seem so life-like.  
IAN: These must be the demons that Vasar talked about. Well they're certainly
the stuff that make legends.  
SABETHA: Look, right in the middle of the ice. It's the key.  
ALTOS: Yes. It couldn't be better protected, could it? A solid block of ice.  
IAN: And four dead warriors to guard it, eh? Each perfectly preserved. They
certainly look frightening enough, don't they.  
BARBARA: There's a pipe here. It runs right round the block of ice.  
SUSAN: Oh, yes, look. It comes out over here. You can see it running
underneath the ice.  
BARBARA: Ian, over here. It's a sort of valve, or something.  
(She starts turning it)  
IAN: Whoa, steady on. Go on turning it. It's getting warmer. (the pipe)  
SABETHA: But how could it be? Where could the heat come from?  
BARBARA: Must be a volcanic spring buried deep in the bowels of the earth.
Like the hot springs in Iceland.  
SABETHA: Iceland? Where's that?  
IAN: In our own country, far away.  
SUSAN: It's melting.  
ALTOS: Quite quickly.  
IAN: Well, while we're waiting for it to melt, let's go and see what we can do
about that bridge.

**[Bridge]**

(Ian is tying two logs together)  
IAN: With any luck they'll freeze together. Cold on the hands, isn't it. Well,
lets get it over. Careful. We don't want it to break. Right, slide it along
that one gently. Right, now careful when it comes off the end. Careful. Oh, it
didn't break. Right, let's get some more, pile them round. Where are the
girls?  
ALTOS: I asked them to go and see how the melting process was coming along.

**[Knight's room]**

(Two of the guards look as if they've fallen over)  
SABETHA: The key!  
BARBARA: Ian, Altos, it's all right. The ice has melted.  
SUSAN: Hey, look at these weapons. Wouldn't like to come across one of these
in a battle.  
(The guard straightens up)  
SUSAN: He's alive! He's alive!  
IAN: What's the matter? Get out of here! Run! Have you got the key?  
SABETHA: Yes!  
IAN: Then run!  
(The four guards advance slowly on Ian blocking the exit)

**[Bridge]**

(Susan ties part of the old rope bridge around her wrist, then slowly crawls
onto Ian's new bridge)  
BARBARA: Susan.  
ALTOS: It'll never take her weight. It can't have frozen solid yet.  
(a piece of the wood breaks away but she keeps going. Ian pulls down the rock
that is holding up the ice wall to hold up the guards. Susan makes it to the
other side and pulls the old rope bridge back into place)  
ALTOS: Well done, Susan. Come on, Sabetha. Get ready. You first.  
(The guards get past the fallen rock as the adults cross the rope bridge)  
IAN: Right, you carry on. I'll catch you up.  
(Ian unfastens the rope bridge, and a guard falls screaming down into the
crevasse)

**[Vasar's hut]**

(Vasar is gloating over the travel dials and micro-keys when the travellers
burst in)  
VASAR: What? How did you get?  
IAN: We've come to collect our things, Vasar.  
VASAR: No! No! No! No!  
(Vasar runs out)  
IAN: Here, Sabetha, put those round your neck. Now, put the travel dial on.
We've all got our travel dials on? We'll keep our date with the Doctor.  
VASAR: They're coming, they're coming. The devils from the mountain are coming
here.  
(There's a hammering at the door)  
IAN: I'm afraid you'll have to entertain them alone, Vasar. We have to leave
you.  
VASAR: (grabbing Susan) No! You stay, you hear? Stay, or I'll kill her.  
IAN: Take your hands off her.  
VASAR: I'm going out the back way.  
(He lets go of Susan then falls forward. He's been stabbed in the back by a
sword stuck through the door)  
IAN: He's dead. The dials, quick, the dials.  
(The three guards burst in and find no one alive)

**[Vault]**

(It's a room with display cases, and a body on the floor. As Ian tries to open
the case with the key in it, he gets hit on the head. Then his attacker puts
the weapon into Ian's hand, takes his travel dial, opens the case so an alarm
goes off and takes the key for himself)

__**Episode Five - Sentence of Death**__

**[Vault]**

(The alarm has stopped when Ian wakes up with a bad headache, and discovers
that the key is gone)  
Do you want to tell me where you've hidden it?  
IAN: Who are you?  
TARRON: My name is Tarron. I'm an interrogator in the Guardian Division. You
feel well enough to talk?  
IAN: Well, my head's pretty sore. What happened here?  
TARRON: I'm waiting for you to tell me.  
IAN: Me? I don't know much. I just came through that door.  
TARRON: It was unlocked?  
IAN: It was ajar. I saw the body on the floor, I bent down to have a look, and
someone hit me on the head from behind.  
TARRON: You could not have come through that door unless the guard on duty in
here let you in.  
IAN: It was open. I've already told you.  
TARRON: This is a maximum security vault. No one is admitted until they've
undergone a complete probity check. There's no record of you ever having
completed such a check.  
IAN: Well of course there isn't. I've never been here before.  
TARRON: However, you did get inside. I must assume that you either tricked the
guard there or you were in league with him.  
IAN: What? What are you talking about? I told you how I got in.  
TARRON: Yes, and I'm recording all your answers. Do you feel well enough? Are
you going to tell me the truth?  
IAN: Yes, well, as far as I can, but  
TARRON: Well, let's be orderly about this. Name?  
IAN: Ian Chesterton.  
TARRON: You are a visitor to this district?  
IAN: Yes.  
TARRON: Your work?  
IAN: I'm a teacher. Science.  
TARRON: Hmm. You know the purpose of the micro-key? No reply. It would make my
report complete if you would tell me how you got rid of the micro-key.  
IAN: I didn't get rid of it. I never had it. I saw it in that glass case
before someone hit me on the back of the head.  
TARRON: While you were unconscious, my men searched the room. They searched
you and the body of the guard. They didn't find it. Now, what did you do with
it?  
IAN: I didn't do anything with it. I told you all I know.  
TARRON: All right. (into telephone) Open your side. We're coming out.  
IAN: Where are we going?  
TARRON: To the Guardian building. You will be charged formally.  
IAN: Charged? With what?  
TARRON: Murder.  
IAN: Just a minute, what's your name? Tarron?  
TARRON: Yes.  
IAN: This business is beginning to run away from me. I've told you the truth!  
TARRON: That isn't for me to decide.  
IAN: But there was another man in here. I've got a lump on the back of my head
to prove it.  
TARRON: The dead man could have hit you before he was killed.  
IAN: I suppose I killed him while I was unconscious.  
TARRON: Well it does suggest you had an accomplice, I agree. So you had better
produce him. That's my advice to you, for what it's worth.  
IAN: I don't have to produce him, Tarron. You do. This is circumstantial
evidence. You must prove that I did the actual killing.  
TARRON: That is contrary to our legal system.  
IAN: What?  
TARRON: I mean that you are already guilty of this crime. The burden of
defence is entirely yours. You must prove without any shadow of doubt that you
are innocent, otherwise  
IAN: Otherwise?  
TARRON: You will die. If you will take my advice, you will find someone to
speak for you at the tribunal. Do you know any body in the city?  
IAN: Yes, I do know someone, if I can find him.  
TARRON: Who is he?  
IAN: Who? He's a doctor.

**[Reception desk]**

CLERK: Permission has been granted for you to attend the court proceedings.  
BARBARA: Thank you.  
CLERK: But I'm to tell you there must be no disturbances of any kind. The laws
are very rigid. Offenders can be sent for one year to the glass factories in
the desert, instantly and without trial.  
BARBARA: I understand.  
CLERK: Chief Enquirer Tarron has arranged for you to speak to your friend, but
you do understand that you mustn't give him any packets or articles not
previously examined by me, yes? Good.  
(Barbara goes to sit with Altos, as Sabetha and Susan enter)  
BARBARA: Any news?  
SUSAN: No, not a sign of him anywhere.  
SABETHA: Several people saw him only two days ago.  
ALTOS: Was that before or after Ian was arrested.  
SUSAN: Well, after, as far as we can work it out.  
ALTOS: I haven't been able to find out anything about my friend Eprin either.  
BARBARA: Well, we've got permission to see Ian, anyway.  
SUSAN: Oh, good. Couldn't we make a dash for it?  
BARBARA: No, it's too dangerous.  
(Ian and Tarron enter)  
BARBARA: How are you?  
IAN: They're treating me well enough. Have you found the Doctor yet?  
BARBARA: No. There isn't a sight or sound of him anywhere.  
IAN: We must find him, Barbara. We must. The laws in this country are a
mockery.  
DOCTOR: I quite agree with you, my boy.  
IAN: Doctor!  
SUSAN: Grandfather!  
BARBARA: How did you get here?  ALTOS: We looked everywhere.  
SUSAN: I'm just glad we're back together again.  
DOCTOR: Yes, so am I, dear child. So am I. However, we have some important
work to attend to. Excuse me. Chesterton, you and I must have a talk.  
IAN: We haven't much time for a talk, Doctor. In a moment I've got to go in
there and face an accusation of murder. I need a man to defend me.  
DOCTOR: I am that man.

**[Courtroom]**

(The three judges take their places on the bench)  
JUDGE: Our decision on the report of Chief Enquirer Tarron is that the
prisoner, Ian Chesterton, is guilty of murder and that his sentence is death.
The said sentence to be administered three days after the end of this hearing,
unless the representative for the accused can show positive proof why the
execution should not be carried out. Will you stand up?  
(The Doctor stands)  
JUDGE: Representative for the defence, you have a grave duty. You have offered
your services in this matter, which complies with the law of the city of
Millenius, in that any person may speak on behalf of another. Are you
acquainted with our laws?  
DOCTOR: Yes, I have studied some, my Lord.  
JUDGE: Every latitude will be allowed to you, and if you are at fault, I will
give you directions.  
DOCTOR: Thank you.  
JUDGE: The representative of the court, Eyesen, has spoken his facts. You may
now reply.  
DOCTOR: My Lords, I cannot defend a man when I have not considered every
aspect of the case. I must have time to examine witnesses, read statements and
to prepare my case.  
EYESEN: I object most strongly.  
JUDGE: The demand is reasonable in itself. The crime of murder in Millenius is
in itself unusual. Then I grant you two days.  
DOCTOR: Thank you, my Lord.  
(The court rises)  
EYESEN: I congratulate you.  
DOCTOR: Thank you.  
EYESEN: It will not alter the outcome.  
DOCTOR: We shall see.  
IAN: Well done, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: I've been starting and studying their laws ever since I heard that
Eprin had been murdered.  
ALTOS: Eprin?  
IAN: He was your friend?  
ALTOS: Yes. You found him, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Oh, yes, I had met him and arranged to take the micro-key, but
something must have happened. That's why he tried to take the key earlier than
we'd arranged.  
SABETHA: And he was killed?  
DOCTOR: Yes. He must have told his plans to someone else and that someone else
killed him and took the key.  
IAN: Then all we have to do is find out who took the key and why.  
ALTOS: In two days.  
DOCTOR: Yes, we shall need every minute of that. Now, we must all take a task
on. Murder, I gather, is very rare here. Now, I want both of you to go to the
library and find out all the case histories you can. Facts and figures.  
ALTOS: Sentences.  
SABETHA: And reasons for people being found not guilty.  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, quite. Now, off you go, both of you, and meet me back here
in three hours.  
ALTOS: Right.  
(Altos and Sabetha leave)  
SUSAN: What can I do, Grandfather?  
DOCTOR: Well, you, my child, and Barbara, can be my detectives. And you, my
friend.  
IAN: Yes. What can I do, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Trust me.

**[Vault]**

TARRON: There was a mace beside the body, and there was blood on it.
Chesterton was on the floor, unconscious. Either he slipped and bumped his
head, or Eprin had got a blow in before he died.  
BARBARA: And the key was gone, you say.  
TARRON: Yes, and that's the only element of the case I don't understand. My
men did a heat reflector search of this room. It is absolutely certain that
the micro-key isn't in here. It is equally certain that it's not been taken
from here.  
DOCTOR: Oh, come now, Tarron. We're not dealing in magic, you know. It's
obvious to me the key must have been taken from this room.  
TARRON: No. every person that came in here was checked by the autho-ray
scanner as they went out. If anyone had the key on them, the scanner would
have detected it.  
SUSAN: Supposing the murderer hid the key on the body?  
TARRON: The body was searched. It wasn't there.  
DOCTOR: Then would you mind telling us what happened after the alarm bell
went, please?  
TARRON: Well, the relief guard was the first to reach the outside of the door.
He was joined almost immediately by the Controller and a Guardian who was on
patrol outside. When I reached the door, it was opened and, well, you know
what we found inside.  
SUSAN: That's fantastic. It couldn't disappear into thin air.  
DOCTOR: Precisely, and I rather gather when we discover its location we shall
also discover the real identity of the murderer.  
TARRON: But we know the murderer. It was Chesterton.  
DOCTOR: Mister Tarron, I wonder if you'd mind leaving us alone for a few
moments. We'd like to discuss the aspects of this case.  
TARRON: Very well.  
DOCTOR: Thank you.  
(Tarron leaves)  
DOCTOR: Yes, well, hmm.  
BARBARA: Any ideas? Well?  
DOCTOR: What?  
BARBARA: Have you any ideas how the key got out of here?  
DOCTOR: Oh, well, elementary, elementary.  
SUSAN: Grandfather, do you mean you know? How? Where?  
DOCTOR: All in good time, my child. The important is I believe I know who did
the killing.  
BARBARA: But how? Tarron's been working on it all day. You've only been here a
few minutes.  
DOCTOR: You see, Tarron never doubted that Chesterton was guilty. A grave
error. Yes, a very grave error.  
SUSAN: Yes, where as we know he's innocent.  
DOCTOR: Precisely. But someone did it, and we also know there was a third man
in the room. How he got in here we shall know in a moment. Now let us assume
he was hiding. Yes. Behind this door. Now, Barbara, you imagine that you are
Chesterton for a moment. Come here. Now please, you look into the room, you
see a body on the floor. What do you do?  
BARBARA: I'd see if I could help.  
SUSAN: I'll be the body.  
DOCTOR: Good. Right, now let me see you do it. There's a weapon beside the
body. Do you examine it?  
BARBARA: Yes, yes, I think I would.  
DOCTOR: Good. Then you look up in front of you and you see exactly what you
came here for, the micro-key. Unbeknown to you, the third man comes out of
hiding, creeps up behind you, and you are struck down, so. Now, he could take
what he came here for. He opens the case, lifts the key, the alarm bell
sounds. Now, he only has a few seconds so he conceals the key, runs to the
door, opens it, gets out and then closes it. But he can't go any further
because already the security guards and officials are on their way. So he
decides to pretend that he is first on the scene!  
SUSAN: The relief guard!  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
BARBARA: Yes, of course. That's why the guard inside let him in in the first
place. He knew him. He even expected him.  
DOCTOR: Yes, he went in, killed his colleague, heard Chesterton in the hall,
hid behind the door and the rest we know.  
SUSAN: That must be how it happened. I'll go and tell Tarron.  
DOCTOR: My dear child, this is only a theory. We must have proof.  
BARBARA: But surely, if you know where the key is, that's proof.  
DOCTOR: If Tarron were to know that now, his case against Chesterton would be
complete. I can't prove at this very moment that Chesterton didn't hide in its
present location.  
BARBARA: Oh. What do we do, then?  
DOCTOR: I have a little errand for you, and I think you will find it very,
very interesting.

**[Ayden's home]**

KALA: Oh. Please come in.  
BARBARA: Thank you.  
KALA: I'm afraid my husband isn't here at the moment. Do sit down.  
BARBARA: I did want to talk to your husband. I thought there might be some
facts he'd overlooked.  
KALA: I'm sure he'd want to help, but he's already told you everything he
knows.  
BARBARA: Well, there might be some small thing, something he thought
unimportant.  
KALA: The Guardians are very thorough, you know. Anyway, he'd want the
murderer to be caught. Eprin was a good friend of his. He wouldn't conceal
anything.  
BARBARA: No, of course not. Tell me, why would anyone want to steal the micro-
key?  
KALA: Because there are only five of them in the entire universe. It was
brought to the city years ago by a man called Arbitan. It was the sworn duty
of the Elders to protect it.  
SUSAN: So they'd pay highly to recover it.  
KALA: Yes, but you know all this. Why else would your friend steal it?  
AYDEN: I had to go to the Guardian building again. They're asking questions
about  
(He sees Barbara and Susan sitting on the settee)  
AYDEN: You're one of the people with Chesterton. What are you doing here?  
BARBARA: I want to talk to you.  
AYDEN: I have nothing to say to you. Get out.  
KALA: Ayden.  
AYDEN: I don't want people prying into my affairs. Has she been asking
questions about me?  
SUSAN: Not as many as my Grandfather will ask when he calls you as a witness.  
AYDEN: Get out! You heard me, get out!  
SUSAN: I thought you might like to know that we know where the key is hidden.  
BARBARA: Susan!  
AYDEN: But you couldn't know where it is. I. Yes, yes, you know where it's
hidden because Chesterton told you where he hid it. And now you're trying to
throw suspicion on me. Well it won't work. Now get out before I  
BARBARA: Before you what?  
SUSAN: Kill us like you killed Eprin?  
(He raises his hand to hit Susan, but stops himself.  
KALA: You'd better go.

**[Corridor]**

(Barbara and Susan eavesdrop)  
AYDEN [OC]: What were they doing here?  
KALA [OC]: Asking a few questions, nothing more.  
AYDEN [OC]: What did she mean about the key?  KALA [OC]: I don't know what she
meant, but you shouldn't have lost your temper like that. It was very foolish
of you.  
AYDEN [OC]: Don't you talk to me like that.  
(It sounds like he has hit Kala very hard. Barbara tries to look through the
keyhole as Ayden makes a telephonic communication. Then there are footsteps
and they have to leave)

**[Ayden's home]**

EYESEN [OC]: Eyesen here.

**[Guardian HQ]**

EYESEN: Don't say any more, there are people near. I'll take it on the
personal. All right, go ahead. (pause) You really think she knows something?
(pause) You mean that our young friend might not be able to go through with
it? (pause) Well listen carefully, and I'll tell you what you may have to do.

**[Courtroom]**

EYESEN: This mace, a weapon used in primitive times by vicious, savage,
warmakers. The same savagery that wielded it then lives on in men like the
accused. Members of the tribunal, the evidence already offered is more than
enough to ensure the conviction of this man. But add to it the fact that under
psychometric examination this mace was found to have been held in the right
hand of the prisoner. I need say no more. That concludes the evidence for the
prosecution.  
JUDGE: We will now hear the statement from the representative of the accused
and convicted.  
DOCTOR: My Lords, let me begin by saying that the murderer is without any
doubt in this chamber. The trouble is, he's not under arrest, but my young
friend here is.  
JUDGE: But, can you substantiate this?  
DOCTOR: I can, my Lord. You will know his identity in a moment. I will now
call my first witness. Thank you.  
(Sabetha gets up. The Doctor holds up a picture of a micro-key)  
DOCTOR: This, my Lords, is a reproduction of the stolen micro-key. Do you
recognise this, young lady?  
SABETHA: Yes.  
DOCTOR: And do you know where it is now?  
SABETHA: Yes, I do.  
DOCTOR: Then please tell the tribunal where its present location is.  
SABETHA: It is here.  
(And she holds up a micro-key, to general consternation)  
DOCTOR: Where did you get it?  
SABETHA: It was given to me by the man who killed the guard.  
DOCTOR: Is he here?  
SABETHA: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Then please point him out to us.  
SABETHA: There, sitting in the front row.  
AYSEN: But she can't have found it. I  
(He tries to make a run for it, but Barbara and Susan grab him)  
AYSEN: All right, I'll tell you everything. I'm not in this alone. They made
me do it. I'll tell you  
(There's a flash of light and he falls to the floor, dead. There's a stunned
silence, then Kala drops to her knees next to him, sobbing)  
(Later, when the courtroom has been tidied up again)  
DOCTOR: And so you see, my Lords, when Sabetha was showing the court the
micro-key, it wasn't in actual fact the one that was stolen from the vault.  
JUDGE: You say you have three of the micro-keys in your possession?  
DOCTOR: Yes, my Lord, and we returned to find the last one. Then they would
all be returned to Arbitan.  
JUDGE: The fact remains that the fourth key is missing.  
EYESEN: Still in the place where it was hidden by the murderer Chesterton.  
DOCTOR: Oh, come now. Surely you don't think that he's still guilty? I admit
that I resorted to a subterfuge when Sabetha accused Ayden of taking the key,
but I think the results justifies the means.  
JUDGE: There are a number of other points which we'd like to see cleared up.  
DOCTOR: Yes, my Lord.  
JUDGE: First of all.  
(We switch to another part of the courtroom)  
TARRON: Yes, and I'm having psychometric tests made on the weapon that killed
Ayden.  
IAN: What exactly are these psychometric tests?  
TARRON: Its the science psychometry. Experts are able to divine from an object
the characteristics of the person who last had contact with that object.  
BARBARA: Well that sounds an improvement on fingerprints.  
TARRON: Fingerprints?  
BARBARA: It's not important.  
IAN: Whoever killed Ayden must have been implicated in the theft. Had he
lived, he might have told us everything.  
BARBARA: It was his wife I felt sorry for.  
TARRON: The doctors have given her oblivative drugs and sent her home to rest.
She was hysterical. You'd better resume your places, the tribunal is about to
start again.  
ALTOS: Where's Susan?  
BARBARA: She's gone to get Ian's statement.  
JUDGE: It is clear that Aydon was involved in either the theft or the killing.
It is also clear that he had an accomplice. Bearing in mind that the accused
came here with the express purpose of recovering the micro-key, and
remembering the evidence against him, his guilt becomes even more obvious.
Will the prosecutor please summarise.  
EYESEN: Despite the dramatics and hysterics of recent events, very little has
changed. I submit that the accused did, by threat or coercion, involve Ayden
in the murder and robbery. His last dying words were, they made me do it. They
were the accused and his accomplices. They were standing near him when he was
killed. One of them is responsible for his death.  
(During this speech, a Guardian has whispered to Barbara, and she, Altos and
Sabetha have got up and left)  
EYESEN: I submit that the defence has offered no new evidence, and the
sentence of the tribunal should be carried out.  
JUDGE: The tribunal concurs. Though it has deprived us of more detailed
evidence, the unfortunate death of Guardian Ayden has surely not affected the
issue. We will now hear a statement, a closing statement, from the defence.  
DOCTOR: I beg the indulgence of the tribunal, and ask for time to produce new
evidence.  
JUDGE: Denied. No purpose would be served in delaying these proceedings
further. If you have nothing to add, the accused will be taken from here and
executed in the prescribed manner.

**[Reception area]**

BARBARA: What is it?  
CLERK: A messenger brought this for you.  
BARBARA: Thank you.  
CLERK: I have to get back inside. Will you excuse me?  
SABETHA: What is it?  
BARBARA: It says, there will be another death if you disclose where the key is
hidden.  
ALTOS: What? Barbara, do you realise what this means? It proves that someone
else was involved. We must tell Tarron and the Doctor, quickly.  
BARBARA: Yes, but what does it mean, another death? Whose death?  
(the 'telephone' rings)  
CLERK: Someone wishes to speak to you.  
BARBARA: Hello?  
SUSAN [OC]: I want to speak to Barbara Wright.  
BARBARA: Susan?  
SUSAN [OC]: Barbara, they made me call you.  
BARBARA: Who, Susan? Who?  
SUSAN [OC]: Barbara, listen  
BARBARA: Susan? Susan? Are you there, Susan!  
SUSAN [OC]: They're going to kill me.  
BARBARA: Susan?  
SABETHA: We must tell Tarron.  
BARBARA: No.  
SABETHA: Well, what else can we do? We've got to find her.  
BARBARA: Yes, of course we have, but  
ALTOS: You're thinking of the Doctor.  
BARBARA: He mustn't know anything about this. He must keep his mind absolutely
clear in order to concentrate on Ian. Anyway, how do we know that Tarron isn't
implicated? Who'd suspect the Chief Investigator? He was next to Ayden in
court when he was killed.  
SABETHA: What do we do, Barbara?  
BARBARA: We find Susan ourselves.  
ALTOS: And remember, whoever is behind this kidnapping is either in league
with the murderer, or is the murderer.  
BARBARA: Trouble is, where to begin? Best thing we can do is to go over
everything that's happened to us since we landed in Millenius. There's a link
somewhere, and it's probably the one and only way to save Ian.

**[Cell]**

IAN: How much longer?  
CLERK: Execution is set to take place when the pointer reaches the star.  
(forty minutes, if it was an Earth clock)  
IAN: Will I be allowed to see my friends?  
(a sad shake of the head)

**[Reception area]**

BARBARA: I've got it. I've got it!  
ALTOS: What is it?  
BARBARA: Well, it's a start, anyway.  
ALTOS: Go on.  
BARBARA: Ayden is the only one we know for certain was connected with the
crime. He knew all the others, though. That's probably why he was killed.  
SABETHA: I don't see how that helps.  
ALTOS: Well, they must have been in contact when they were planning the
robbery. It's just possible that his wife, Kala, might know someone that he
was seeing quite frequently.  
SABETHA: But if she did, do you think she'd tell us?  
ALTOS: Well of course she would. She'd be as eager as we are to find the man
that murdered her husband.  
SABETHA: I'm not so sure.  
BARBARA: It's a chance. Come on. It's a chance.

**[Ayden's home]**

KALA: You.  
BARBARA: I'm terribly sorry to disturb you. We know what a terrible ordeal
you've been through, but we think you might be able to help us.  
KALA: I don't think so. I know nothing.  
BARBARA: Oh, please. May we come in?  
KALA: If you must.  
BARBARA: Thank you. The people who murdered your husband have kidnapped Susan,
the young girl who was with us.  
ALTOS: They've threatened to kill her too. We thought it was possible that you
might know someone your husband was seeing quite frequently.  
KALA: I know of no one. My husband was very secretive. He never told me who he
saw or where he went. Now, please, Ayden is dead. If he committed a crime,
he's paid for it. He's dead, but I'll have to live with the memory of his
crime for the rest of my life.  
BARBARA: I'm sorry, but you see, you're our only help.  
KALA: Leave me alone. Leave me alone. I do understand and I sympathise with
you. You must have been sick with worry since you spoke to Susan, but I just
can't help you. I know nothing.  
BARBARA: I'm sorry.  
ALTOS: Come on.  
BARBARA: Please understand, we had to try. Goodbye.  
(Once they have left, Kala stops crying and starts laughing, then opens a
sliding door)  
KALA: Your friends were here looking for you. No, don't look hopeful. They've
gone. They won't be back. They're like all the rest of them. Stupid. Stupid.  
(She answers the telephone)  
KALA: Yes?  
EYESEN [OC]: The trial has just ended. Chesterton is to be executed at the
beginning of the next zenith.  
KALA: Good. The old man didn't say where the key was hidden?  
EYESEN [OC]: No. I'm certain he doesn't know. I'll get it later then come for
you. Be ready.  
KALA: I will. What about the child?  
EYESEN [OC]: She's no more use now, and she can identify you. Kill her.

__**Episode Six - The Keys of Marinus**__

**[Corridor]**

ALTOS: We cannot delay telling the Doctor now.  
BARBARA: Oh, we should have told him long ago. Sabetha, you were right. If
anything's happened to Susan, I'll never forgive myself.  
SABETHA: It was a terrible choice. She sounded so afraid.  
(The penny drops for Barbara)  
SABETHA: What is it?  
BARBARA: What you just said. Kala couldn't have known.  
ALTOS: Known? Known what? What are you talking about?  
BARBARA: Kala said, you must have been sick with worry since you spoke to
Susan. Well how did she know we'd spoken to Susan? We've told no one.  
ALTOS: Then Kala must have been with Susan when she telephoned.  
BARBARA: Yes.  
ALTOS: Come on, we're going back.

**[Aysen's home]**

(Kala takes a weapon from a drawer and goes over to Susan's prison)  
KALA: Seems a pity, really. The old man didn't know where the key was hidden
after all.  
(She has no idea that Altos, Barbara and Sabetha are right behind her)  
KALA: Let me go! Let go of me! Let me go.  
ALTOS: Don't struggle.  
(Barbara unties Susan)  
BARBARA: There.  
SUSAN: Oh, Barbara!

**[Reception area]**

(The Doctor is sitting, disconsolate)  
EYESEN: Don't take it too hard.  
DOCTOR: Hmm? Oh, it's you.  
EYESEN: I just wanted to say what a good job you did on the defence.  
DOCTOR: Yes, and you did an even better job for the prosecution, my man.  
EYESEN: I am sorry we couldn't have met under happier circumstances.  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes.  
EYESEN: Goodbye.  
DOCTOR: Goodbye.  
CLERK: Oh, excuse me. The exhibits and documents. Where do you want them?  
EYESEN: In the cupboard, please. Well, I don't think there's anything else.
Goodbye.  
TARRON: Goodbye, sir.  
(The mace and papers are locked away)  
TARRON: It's time to leave, sir.  
DOCTOR: Leave? I can't leave now. I must find new evidence and re-open the
case.  
(The telephone rings)  
CLERK: Yes?  
BARBARA [OC]: I'd like to speak to Interrogator Tarron.  
TARRON: This is Tarron.  
BARBARA [OC]: This is Barbara Wright. Have you had the results yet on the gun
that killed Ayden?  
TARRON: No, not yet.  
BARBARA [OC]: Well just to save time I'll tell you what they say. Ayden was
killed by his wife, Kala.  
TARRON: What?  
BARBARA [OC]: I'm with her now. Why don't you come and get her?  
TARRON: Come on.  
(Later)  
BARBARA: So we realised Kala couldn't have known we'd talked to Susan.  
SUSAN: Yes, then the three of them crept up behind her and pow!  
BARBARA: Shouldn't have taken the chance, though. I had no right to risk
Susan's life.  
DOCTOR: Perhaps not, perhaps not. However, child, you're safe and well. I wish
I could say the same thing about Chesterton.  
ALTOS: But surely they'll stop the execution now that Kala's confessed.  
DOCTOR: I hope so. I sincerely hope so. Well? Well!  
TARRON: Kala's made a full statement. She's named her accomplice.  
DOCTOR: Ah. Then you can stay the execution.  
TARRON: No, I can't. Kala's sworn testimony states that the man she was
working with was Ian Chesterton.  
DOCTOR: Impossible!  
BARBARA: But she's lying.  
TARRON: Yes, I have doubts myself. She's a vicious, dangerous woman, but just
doubts aren't enough to ask for a stay of execution. They'd need positive
proof.  
SUSAN: What about that man who called on the phone thing? I heard him tell her
to kill me.  
TARRON: Did you recognise the voice?  
SUSAN: No.  
DOCTOR: What else did he say?  
SUSAN: Oh, nothing much. Just that he'd collect the key later and then pick
her up.  
DOCTOR: Collect the key. Ah, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha! Yes, yes. You understand? The
villain that planned all this, the one who planned this whole affair, is now
planning to collect the key! What a wonderful opportunity it gives us to catch
him red-handed. And to release Chesterton!  
(later, the room is dark as a figure enters and unlocks the cupboard. It
removes the mace and is immediately pounced on by two Guardians who were
hiding behind the desk. The Doctor turns on the lights and removes his hood)  
DOCTOR: You!  
TARRON: Call the prison.  
(Later, Eyesen has been taken away and Ian released. The Doctor opens the mace
to reveal)  
SUSAN: The key!  
IAN: How did you know it was there, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: It had to be. I knew it all along. Until we knew the culprit, the
information was no good.  
TARRON: Everyone and everything that went in and out of that vault was
checked. Everything except this mace.  
BARBARA: Have you any idea why they did it?  
TARRON: Oh, yes, they've owned up to everything. Kala and the Prosecutor had
planned to steal the key and sell it, and Chesterton here just happened to
walk right into the middle of it. They made him look so guilty I never doubted
for a moment he was the one.  
DOCTOR: You should read Pyrrho, my boy. He founded Scepticism. A great asset
to your business.  
IAN: Thank heaven you remembered reading Pyrrho, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Reading? What are you talking about? I met the man.  
SUSAN: Whoopee! Now we can go and join Altos and Sabetha.  
IAN: What, have you sent them on ahead, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: There was no point in keeping them here, so I thought it might cheer
Arbitan up to know that we'd been successful.  
BARBARA: Yes, well, it'll be lovely for him to see his daughter again.  
SUSAN: Yes.  
(chat continues in background)  
CLERK: The senior judge has just written this.  
DOCTOR: Ah, is that the authorisation?  
TARRON: You've just got permission to take the key, sir.  
DOCTOR: All we need now is the wrist strap you impounded from Chesterton.  
IAN: Ah. Thank you.  
CLERK: I see you're all wearing them. What are they for?  
DOCTOR: Our means of travel.  
IAN: They do look a bit odd, but they work. They give us movement through
space.  
TARRON: I don't believe it.  
DOCTOR: Show him.  
IAN: All right. Now.  
SUSAN: Ready?  
BARBARA: Steady.  
IAN: Go.  
DOCTOR: Well, one of them might have waited for me. However, I suppose I'd
better join them.  
CLERK: I don't understand. Where have they gone?  
DOCTOR: Goodbye, my friends.  
CLERK: He's gone too.  
TARRON: Yes. He told us what was going to happen and we saw it. But nobody
else has seen it. We'd be better off keeping this story to ourselves.  
CLERK: How are you going to complete the report, Tarron?  
TARRON: I shall say that they left. They left to take the key back to its
inventor, Arbitan.

**[Control room]**

(Altos is being interrogated by the head frogman, who is wearing Arbitan's
robe)  
YARTEK: Arbitan is dead. Do you hear me? I, Yartek, am in control now.  
ALTOS: What have you done with Sabetha?  
YARTEK: Where is the final key?  
ALTOS: I don't know.  
YARTEK: Why are you so stubborn? What purpose does it serve? I'm going to find
out in the end.  
ALTOS: What have you done to Sabetha?  
(Sabetha is brought in)  
ALTOS: Sabetha!  
SABETHA: Why have you tied him up? He's of no use to you.  
YARTEK: Oh?  
SABETHA: He's just a servant. He knows nothing, I tell you.  
YARTEK: He means nothing to you?  
SABETHA: I have no thoughts about him at all. I told you, he's just one of my
servants. Let him go.  
ALTOS: Sabetha.  
SABETHA: Be quiet! I did not give you permission to speak. I tell you he knows
nothing.  
YARTEK: In that case, as you think so little of him, as I gather from the way
you treat him, it doesn't matter what happens to him.  
SABETHA: Of course not. Send him away.  
YARTEK: Yes, I can do that. Or I can have him killed. After all, he's only a
servant. Kill him!  
SABETHA: No!  
YARTEK: Useless lies! Where is the final key?  
SABETHA: I'll never tell you. Never.  
YARTEK: But this man is no servant. He travelled with you. He is in love with
you. I think he will tell me.  
SABETHA: The man who loves me cannot betray me.  
YARTEK: The man who loves you cannot condemn you to death. I can promise you
one thing. If you do not tell me where the final key is, I shall order my
creatures to kill her.  
ALTOS: The man who was with us, the Doctor, he has it.

**[Corridor]**

(The Doctor encounters Ian and the others at a corner, and they startle each
other)  
DOCTOR: What on earth are you doing, dear boy? You frightened the life out of
me.  
IAN: Doctor, I'm sorry.  
SUSAN: Is the Tardis all right?  
DOCTOR: Yes, the forcefield's been lifted, and I peered in for a moment or
two. Now, everything appears to be all right.  
BARBARA: Arbitan kept his promise, then. He said he'd remove the forcefield.  
DOCTOR: Yes, well, come along, come along. You're all running around here like
a lot of scared chickens.  
IAN: We were waiting for you.  
DOCTOR: I'm here! My dear Chesterton, sometimes you drive me round the bend. I
don't know  
SUSAN: Grandfather.  
(The Doctor and Susan go on ahead)  
IAN: Even so, it's a bit odd.  
BARBARA: You mean Sabetha not being here to meet us?  
IAN: Or Altos. We'd better keep our eyes open.

**[Control room]**

VOORD: I have put them in the cell, as ordered.  
YARTEK: Keep well out of sight then now, but be within call.  
(Yartek puts his four micro-keys into the Conscience machine)  
YARTEK: One more. Just one more.

**[Corridor]**

(Suspicious, Ian lures out a waiting Voord at a junction, and the Doctor
knocks him out with his walking stick)  
IAN: Well done, Doctor. I was afraid of this.  
DOCTOR: Yes, and I think it's time now to go back to the ship.  
BARBARA: What about Sabetha and Altos?  
SUSAN: Yes. They may be hiding somewhere.  
IAN: Yes. Right. We split up. Susan, you come with me. We'll go in search of
Arbitan. Doctor, you and Barbara see if you can find Sabetha and Altos. Give
me the key.  
DOCTOR: Here, and don't part with it until you're absolutely sure it goes into
the right hands.  
IAN: Don't worry, I won't. Come on, Susan.  
DOCTOR: And you accompany me, my dear, will you?  
BARBARA: Yes, all right. Look, I think we'll take this with us.  
(She picks up the Voord's dagger)  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes.  
BARBARA: Just in case.

**[Cell]**

(Altos and Sabetha are tied up back to back)  
SABETHA: It's no use. Even if we manage to untie ourselves, we'll never break
the gates down.  
ALTOS: At least I could defend you. I can't even do that.  
SABETHA: At least you're with me, Altos.  
ALTOS: I'll never leave you.

**[Control room]**

(Yartek has put up the hood of the robe to conceal his rubber head. Ian and
Susan enter, and he quickly turns his head away, just in case.  
SUSAN: Arbitan!  
IAN: Thank heaven. We were afraid  
YARTEK: Have you brought the key?  
IAN: Where's Sabetha?  
YARTEK: Where is the old man? He is the one who has the key.  
SUSAN: I don't understand you. We've done all these things for you and all you
can think about is the key.  
YARTEK: Forgive me. The key has filled my mind for so long I've become
insensitive to anything else. Sabetha is safe and well.  
IAN: Do you realise that the full  
YARTEK: Stop! Don't come near me. Power from my machine escaped. I am
suffering from a deadly disease.  
SUSAN: Cam we do anything to help?  
YARTEK: Sabetha alone knows the cure.  
IAN: Where is Altos?  
YARTEK: The young man, who attached himself to her while she was away. Is he a
good man? Is he sincere in his feelings for her?  
IAN: What is your impression of him?  
YARTEK: There are many races of men on Marinus. He looks and sounds well
enough, but I don't know.  
IAN: Naturally, we like and admire him, but since you don't know him you must
make up your own mind.  
YARTEK: I agree, of course. But the key, the final key. Do you have it?  
IAN: Yes.  
SUSAN: Ian.  
IAN: I have it here.  
YARTEK: Throw it down. Good! Now bring the old man to me. Sabetha will be
here, and we can enjoy our triumph together.  
IAN: All right, I will.  
(Ian and Susan leave. Yartek pushes back the hood and picks up the micro-key)  
VOORD: Shall I follow and destroy them?  
YARTEK: No. The machine will enslave them now. Bring Sabetha and the young man
to me. I want them here when the final key is inserted and my power is
absolute.

**[Corridor]**

SUSAN: Ian, that man couldn't have been Arbitan.  
IAN: No. I thought Arbitan sent Altos for the keys. This man said he was a
stranger. He never looked at us. I think there was something funny going on
there.  
SUSAN: But then why give him the key?  
BARBARA: Ian!

**[Cell]**

(The Doctor is untying Sabetha and Altos)  
DOCTOR: So when Yartek gets the final key, his power will be absolute.  
ALTOS: Yes, with the aid of the machine he could control us all.  
DOCTOR: And our impulse to leave this planet would be destroyed.  
SABETHA: That is true.  
SUSAN: Altos, Sabetha.  
(happy greetings all round)  
DOCTOR: You heard about Arbitan?  
IAN: Yes. We met the man who's usurped his place.  
DOCTOR: Give me the key. We must have it destroyed.  
SUSAN: Ian gave it to him.  
DOCTOR: What! You gave it away?  
IAN: I gave him a key. Sabetha, you remember that fake key? Barbara found it
on the idol.  
BARBARA: I remember.  
IAN: That was the key I gave him. This is the genuine key.  
DOCTOR: My dear boy!  
SABETHA: We must go quickly. Leave the building.  
IAN: Why?  
ALTOS: Yartek may put that false key into the machine at any moment. If he
does, it will set the machine in motion, but once it feels the full force of
the power, it'll break under the strain.  
IAN: You mean the machine'll blow up?  
ALTOS: Yes.  
DOCTOR: There's not a moment to loose. Come on!  
ALTOS: And everything in this building with it.  
DOCTOR: To the moving wall!

**[Outer wall]**

DOCTOR: About where you are, Susan.  
IAN: What do you mean, about? Don't you know exactly?  
DOCTOR: Somewhere here. Somewhere here. There's a small stone. It moved under
my hand.  
IAN: Yes.  
(there's a Voord behind them)

**[Control room]**

YARTEK: Why haven't you obeyed my commands? Where's Sabetha?  
VOORD: The others have set them free. They're in the corridor near the cell.  
YARTEK: She will have told them of her father's death, of course, but it
doesn't matter. The machine's power will spread through the planet. There is
no escape now except for us. I will bring them back with this.  
(Yartek puts the fifth micro-key into the machine and it blows up. The
travellers find the door out of the building just as it starts to fall down.

**[Outside the Tardis]**

SUSAN: Everything all right, Grandfather?  
DOCTOR: Yes, my child. Chase the others up, will you?  
SUSAN: Right. (leaves)  
DOCTOR: I'm glad to have this moment alone with you, Sabetha. I want to speak
of your father. You know, he was a very wise and brilliant man, and I know how
you felt when you learned of his death.  
SABETHA: His life's work destroyed.  
DOCTOR: No, no, I wouldn't say that. His work will go on, only not quite in
the same way. But I don't believe that man was made to be controlled by
machines. Machines can make laws, but they cannot preserve justice. Only human
beings can do that. Now I only hope that you'll carry on his good work,
please. Goodbye. Bless you, my child.  
(The Doctor enters the Tardis)  
SUSAN: What are you going to do now?  
ALTOS: We might well return to the city of Millenius.  
SABETHA: We still have our travel dials. It's a good place to start.  
DOCTOR [OC]: Susan!  
SUSAN: We've got to go now. Bye, Sabetha.  
SABETHA: Goodbye, Susan.  
SUSAN: Goodbye, Altos.  
ALTOS: Goodbye, Susan.  
(Susan enters the Tardis)  
IAN: What shall I do with this key? The one I didn't give to Yartek.  
ALTOS: Why don't you give it to the Doctor.  
BARBARA: That's a good idea.  
IAN: All right, I will.  
ALTOS: Goodbye, Barbara.  
BARBARA: Goodbye, Altos.  
SABETHA: We shall think of you often.  
ALTOS: Ian.  
IAN: Goodbye, Altos. Goodbye, Sabetha.  
(Ian enters the Tardis)  
BARBARA: Take care, Altos.  
ALTOS: You may depend on that.  
BARBARA: Oh dear, I shall miss them.  
IAN: Come on, Barbara.  
(The Tardis dematerialises, and on its way to their next adventure)

_Next Episode - The Temple of Evil_  
  
---  
  
<Back to the episode listing

Doctor Who and related marks are trademarks of BBC . Copyright  1963,
Present. The web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment
purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

