**The Space Museum**  

Original Airdate: 24 Apr, 1965  

__**Episode One - The Space Museum**__

**[Tardis]**

(This planet has an array of spaceships on it. The Tardis materialises, and
everybody is wearing their ordinary clothes, not the Crusader ones they had on
when they became immobile at the end of the last episode. The Doctor moves
first, then Vicki.)  
DOCTOR: Oh, lights. Oh, that's better. Ah, good! Well now, we seem to have
materialised much quicker than I thought.  
IAN: Doctor, we've got our clothes on.  
DOCTOR: Well, I should hope so, dear boy. I should hope so.  
BARBARA: No, Doctor. Our ordinary, everyday clothes.  
DOCTOR: Well, upon my soul, yes. Yes. Now isn't that extraordinary? Yes, we
were wearing those cloaks and things, weren't we? Well, I must say, it's going
to save us a lot of bother changing. Yes. Now, lets see where we are, shall
we?  
IAN: Doctor! You can't dismiss it like that! We were standing here in
thirteenth century clothes. We can't suddenly  
DOCTOR: My dear boy, it's over and done with. Now lets forget it. See where we
are. Come along, pay attention.  
VICKI: But Doctor, where are the clothes we were wearing?  
DOCTOR: I expect, child, they're hanging up where they're supposed to be. If
you're that much concerned, go and have a look.  
VICKI: All right. I will.  
DOCTOR: And on your way back, bring me glass of water please, I'm very
parched.  
VICKI: Okay.  
(Vicki leaves)  
DOCTOR: Oh, dear, dear, dear. Now where were we? All this fussation about a
change of clothes. You know, its so simple. It's time and relativity, my dear
boy. Time and relativity. That's where the answer lies.  
IAN: I dare say it does, Doctor, but we'd be a lot happier if you would
explain it to us.  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, I know. Well, at the moment there isn't time. Now, just pay
attention, will you? (Looking up at the scanner.) What's this?  
VICKI [OC]: Doctor! Our crusading clothes are here.  
DOCTOR: Good, good! There you are, you see? Yes, you see?

**[Tardis living area]**

(Vicki gets a glass of water from the dispenser, but drops it. Then the broken
pieces reverse and reform into a complete glass of water again)

**[Tardis]**

DOCTOR: Well, the scanners functioning. Looks like desert to me.  
BARBARA: Oh look! Spaceships!  
(On the scanner, the multitude of spacecraft appears.)  
BARBARA: Well, it's so quiet, it could be a graveyard.  
IAN: No, more like a launching pad to me. Maybe it's a dumping ground.  
DOCTOR: No, I don't think so, my boy, no. No, all those things up there come
from a different period.  
BARBARA: Well, there isn't any sign of life. Look! There's a building. What do
you make of that, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Well, I'm afraid I can't give you any answers here, my dear.  
IAN: You mean you want to go and have a closer look, eh?  
DOCTOR: Yes, I don't see why not. After all, the readings say it's quite safe.  
BARBARA: Safe? Well the readings don't always tell us everything, you know.  
(Vicki brings the glass of water and the Doctor drinks it)  
DOCTOR: Oh, thank you, my dear. Thank you. So you dropped a glass, did you?  
VICKI: Yes, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Well, don't look so concerned, child. It's quite easily replaced.  
VICKI: Doctor, it doesn't have to be. It all came together again and jumped up
into my hand. Well, if you don't believe me, you can go and look. There hasn't
been time to clear it up yet.  
DOCTOR: Oh, yes, yes, yes, we believe you, child. Yes, we believe you.  
VICKI: Honestly, that's exactly what happened.  
BARBARA: You dropped a glass, and it came together again in your hands?  
VICKI: With the water in it.  
DOCTOR: Well, look! Look! You see where we've landed? On a museum.  
IAN: A museum?  
BARBARA: A space museum, yes!  
DOCTOR: Precisely. If you take a closer look at those objects, you'll see that
some of them are more advanced in design. It's quite a natural progression.  
IAN: Oh, well, someone must be in charge of them.  
DOCTOR: Yes, we shall find that out. And I'm sure you will agree with me,
there are several things that we would like an answer to. So I suggest we go
outside and take a look for ourselves, hmm?

**[Planet surface]**

IAN: Dust everywhere. Maybe you were right about the graveyard.  
(The Doctor locks the Tardis)  
VICKI: Hey, Doctor. Come here and have a look at this.  
DOCTOR: Well, isn't that extraordinary? I've never seen erosion in such an
advanced stage. The whole planet appears to be completely dead.  
IAN: Dead?  
DOCTOR: Non-existent, extinct.  
IAN: Oh? I've always associated extinction with extreme cold. You know,
something like the dark side of the moon. Haven't you?  
BARBARA: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Well, I must say, the atmosphere's quite pleasant.  
IAN: Yeah.  
BARBARA: Well, maybe it'll get colder as it gets dark.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I think we shall just have to go and search for the answers, and
as there's always the element of danger in the unknown, I suggest we keep
closer together. Is that clear?  
IAN: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Vicki?  
VICKI: Oh, er, yes, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Good, good. Now I'll take the lead and lets try and find those
buildings we saw on the scanner.  
IAN: Doctor!  
DOCTOR: Oh, what is it now, dear boy?  
IAN: We're walking on dust. Several inches thick, I'd say.  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, so it appears, hmm.  
IAN: Then why aren't we leaving any footprints?  
DOCTOR: Yes, that's curious, isn't it? Yes, very curious.

**[Museum entrance]**

(The walls of the museum are made of something very alien, with triangular
bits sticking out to form a texture)  
BARBARA: What an extraordinary building.  
IAN: Yes. This looks like the only door.  
BARBARA: No windows either.  
DOCTOR: Well, we certainly haven't met anyone yet.  
VICKI: Maybe there isn't anybody.  
DOCTOR: How are we going to get in there?  
IAN: Well, I don't know. There doesn't seem to be any way of opening the door.  
BARBARA: Have you noticed something? I mean something very peculiar.  
IAN: Well, everything's peculiar.  
DOCTOR: My dear Barbara, if you've seen something or somebody, there's no
sense in talking in riddles, is there?  
BARBARA: No Doctor, not seen. Its the silence. When we stop talking, there
isn't a sound. Listen. It's the sort of silence you can almost hear.  
IAN: More and more like a graveyard.  
DOCTOR: Oh, that's quite enough. Now stop it. You'll have us all imagining
things. There must be an explanation of this little  
(The doors open showing two people coming towards them)  
IAN: There's someone coming!  
DOCTOR: Hide quickly!  
VICKI: Where?  
DOCTOR: Up against the wall. Quick!  
(Barbara stops Vicki sneezing as two men in white approach. But as they go
past Vicki does sneeze)  
VICKI: I'm sorry! It just came out.  
BARBARA: It's all right, Vicki. They didn't hear it.  
IAN: They were only a few feet away.  
BARBARA: I know.  
DOCTOR: It's extremely doubtful that they were both deaf. However, the fact
is, they didn't hear. Now, let's see what's in here.

**[Museum entrance hall]**

(Some mechanical equipment and a spacesuit on display)  
BARBARA: Well, there aren't any windows.  
DOCTOR: No, I think there's probably something in the atmosphere that, er, has
a very slow destructive property, er, hence the lack of windows.  
BARBARA: Yes, but I don't understand where the light comes from?  
DOCTOR: Oh, I think that might just be some florescent substance in the walls.
Yes, well, I think you two must admit that my assumption as to where we were,
has been proved correct.  
IAN: Yes, we might almost be in a museum at home.  
VICKI: Except that there are no little men following you about telling you not
touch things.  
DOCTOR: Well, you just pretend there are, young lady, and keep your hands to
yourself.  
BARBARA: Well, everything seems quite normal.  
DOCTOR: Well why not? Why shouldn't it be? It's quite natural. After all, you
have objects of historical interest on Earth, so why not a museum in space? I
always thought I'd find one someday.  
IAN: Those two men we saw must have been guards. Who started all this, do you
think, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Well, I suppose the answer's here somewhere. That's what we've got to
find out. Let's go and have a look in that other room.

**[Museum Exhibit room]**

DOCTOR: Chesterton!  
IAN: It can't be!  
(The adults recoil at the sight of a large pepperpot with a bad disposition,
but it is only an exhibit labelled Dalek, Planet Skaro.)  
VICKI: So that's what a Dalek looks like.  
DOCTOR: Don't touch, child.  
BARBARA: What do you know about them, Vicki?  
VICKI: Only what I've read in history books. That they invaded Earth about
three hundred years ago, was it?  
IAN: We were there, Vicki. That was one of the periods we visited.  
DOCTOR: I don't mind admitting, my boy, that that thing gave me a start.
Coming face to face to it again.  
VICKI: It's not a bit the way I imagined it. Oh, I mean, the books describe
them all right but well, this one looks quite friendly.  
BARBARA: Friendly?  
IAN: You wouldn't say that, young lady, if ever we meet them again. Which to
say the least is very unlikely. I hope.  
DOCTOR: Back. Get behind the case. Quick. Quick. Quick. Don't touch it.  
(They crouch down as two young men in black enter the room. They appear to be
talking although we don't hear them. They look around then leave.)  
IAN: All right. They've gone.  
VICKI: They were talking.  
DOCTOR: Undoubtedly.  
BARBARA: Yet we didn't hear a word they said.  
IAN: No. Perhaps they have some other means of communication. You know, on a
very high frequency, or. No? Not very good?  
BARBARA: What do you think, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Well, I don't know. Chesterton might have had the answer in what he
just said but, er, I doubt it, I doubt it. Come on. Come on.

**[Another Museum room]**

IAN: Well, they didn't seem hostile. That's something to be thankful for.  
BARBARA: Oh, I don't know. Even the Daleks are friendly to some.  
IAN: Vicki, yes.  
BARBARA: Anyway, even if they are friendly, I doubt if we'll get much
conversation out of them, unless one of you can lip-read.  
(Vicki tries to touch an exhibit but her hand passes through it)  
VICKI: Doctor! Doctor!  
DOCTOR: Child, don't make so much noise. What's the matter?  
VICKI: I touched that thing and  
DOCTOR: I thought I told you not to touch. When are you going to learn to obey
me? How you  
BARBARA: All right, Doctor. You can save the scolding till later. Look, can't
you see that Vicki's upset?  
DOCTOR: Upset? Upset? Whatever for? Why are you upset child? What's the
matter?  
VICKI: I touched that thing and my hand went right through it.  
(Ian tries to touch the apparatus too)  
VICKI: See? There isn't anything there, is there?  
DOCTOR: Incredible.  
VICKI: Well, there is something there, isn't there? I mean, we can all see it,
can't we?  
BARBARA: Yes, of course we can, Vicki.  
DOCTOR: That's strange. Strange indeed. You know, there must be a logical
explanation for this somewhere? You know, I think it's just a matter of
putting two and two together to make three. You know there is  
IAN: Doctor, look.  
(three black-clad men have entered)  
VICKI: Oh, quick, let's hide!  
BARBARA: Well, where can we hide? Doctor, what shall we do?  
DOCTOR: Nothing. Absolutely nothing. Stand exactly where we are.  
(the three men walk past them)  
IAN: What do you make of that?  
DOCTOR: I've never known anything in my life. In all my years of time
travelling, I  
VICKI: That one looked straight at me.  
DOCTOR: Utterly unbelievable.  
VICKI: And he was talking. His lips were moving.  
DOCTOR: Yes, so strange. And yet we have no communication with them.  
BARBARA: Well then, obviously they couldn't see us. I mean, we're strangers,
our clothes are different. If they had seen us, they would have made some
sign, however slight.  
IAN: Right, we're invisible. That settles it.  
DOCTOR: Does it, my boy? Does it? Either that or we're not really here.

**[Museum Exhibit room]**

(another one)  
IAN: It's the biggest museum I've ever been in. We must have walked for miles.  
VICKI: And all the rooms are exactly the same, just cases and cabinets. I'm
beginning to think the Doctor's wrong.  
IAN: Oh?  
VICKI: Well, how can we find the answer in here?  
DOCTOR: I have no idea, my child, but until I say otherwise, we continue the
search. Now, let us see what's in here, hmm?  
BARBARA: Oh, same as all the others, I suppose.  
(and there's the Tardis)  
DOCTOR: Good gracious me!  
IAN: Well, how did that get in here?  
BARBARA: What does it matter? Look, now that we've found the Tardis, come on,
let's get out of here.  
IAN: Yes, I agree, it's a stroke of luck. Let's leave at once.  
VICKI: I've had enough of this place, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Oh? You've all decided, have you?  
(But the Tardis isn't tangible)  
DOCTOR: Yes, I'm afraid it's going to be a little more difficult than that.
The mists are beginning to clear slightly. I'm just beginning to see reason.
Where are we? Where are we?  
BARBARA: Well, here, surely?  
DOCTOR: Are we? We must have arrived here in the Tardis sometime. Are we here?
Look!  
(Then they see themselves in exhibit cases)  
BARBARA: That's us. That's not models or pictures. That's us.  
DOCTOR: Yes, exhibits in a Space Museum.  
IAN: Can you explain it, Doctor?  
VICKI: Time, like space, although a dimension in itself also has dimensions of
its own.  
DOCTOR: So you know about it, child? We must have a little chat some time.  
VICKI: Yes, you see, we really are in those cases, but we're also standing
here looking at ourselves from this dimension.  
BARBARA: Well, it's horrible. Those faces, our faces, just staring.  
IAN: Well, at least it explains what's been happening to us.  
DOCTOR: Yes, it does, my boy. And if we're not there, we can't leave
footprints, and break glasses, or touch things.  
IAN: And nobody can see us. I see.  
DOCTOR: Oh yes, they can. Oh yes, they can see us where we really are. There.  
BARBARA: Is there anyway of getting out of this, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Well, my dear, I suppose we got into it. There must be. You know, I
don't mind admitting, I've always found it extremely difficult to solve the
fourth dimension. And here we are. Face to face with the fourth dimension. You
know, I think the Tardis jumped a time track and ended up here in this fourth
dimension. It's extraordinary. It's inexplicable. No, wait a minute, wait a
minute. I think you're all going to be delighted. I'm going to come up with
the answer and it's so simple. Yes, so simple.  
BARBARA: How simple?  
DOCTOR: All we have to do is to wait here until we arrive.  
BARBARA: I beg your pardon?  
DOCTOR: You see, my dear, before they actually put us in those glass cases, we
must have arrived here sometime in the Tardis. These people saw us and thought
we were worthy people to be put in their Space Museum. Then  
BARBARA: I see! I think.  
DOCTOR: But nothing has happened to us yet. What we are doing now is taking a
glimpse into the future, or what might be or could be the future. All that
leads up to it, is still yet to come.  
VICKI: Doctor, look. Why don't we go and find the Tardis, the real one I mean,
and get into it and get out of here now?  
DOCTOR: And end up one day, my dear, like that? No, we must not. We've got to
stop it happening.  
IAN: Doctor, when will we arrive?  
DOCTOR: I don't know, my boy, I can't be certain. You see, I'm quite unable to
measure the time dimension that the Tardis jumped. But you'll notice we're all
wearing the same clothes. So, it could be in a few moments, or a few seconds.  
BARBARA: Well, how will we know when we have? Arrived, I mean.  
DOCTOR: The cases will disappear and we shall all become visible.  
IAN: And from that moment we'll be in great danger.  
DOCTOR: Precisely. So you see we must succeed in stopping them making exhibits
of us. Otherwise, well, there it is. That's how we're all going to end up.  
BARBARA: Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Hmm?  
BARBARA: Something strange is happening! I can feel it.

**[Tardis]**

(The four figures in Arabian clothes change into sixties clothes. A glass
breaks and stays broken. Two white-clothed men find the Tardis and see the
footprints in the dust.)

**[Museum Exhibit room]**

(The cases and their occupants disappear, and the group unfreeze)  
BARBARA: They've gone.  
DOCTOR: Yes, my dear. And we've arrived.

__**Episode Two - The Dimensions of Time**__

**[Governor's office]**

(A white-clothed man brings a piece of equipment in and puts it on a table)  
TECHNICIAN: Best I could do sir. It should be good for another hundred years
or so.  
LOBOS: (the governor) What was wrong with it?  
TECHNICIAN: Well, the clasps had broken, rotted.  
LOBOS: Like everything on this planet, including us. Well, I've got two more
mimmians before I can go home. Yes, I say it often enough, but it's still two
thousand Xeron days and it sounds more in days. Yeah, I know, I volunteered,
you were ordered. If the truth were known, I was just as bored on Morok. Still
it was home, and youth never appreciates what it has. Oh, I don't know what
I'm going to do now. Still, let's get on with it, shall we? I have to sign
these reports. I don't know.  
(a messenger enters)  
LOBOS: I'm the governor of this planet. You're supposed to show some respect
and knock.  
MESSENGER: I'm sorry, sir, the matter's urgent.  
LOBOS: Nothing's so urgent you can't knock on my door.  
MESSENGER: A ship has landed.  
LOBOS: From home? There was no advance notification.  
MESSENGER: Not from the planet Morok. Alien.  
LOBOS: Alien? Well, this will indeed be a red letter day for the Xeros
calendar. Have the crew been detained?  
MESSENGER: No, sir. They've left the ship. We've found footprints but no trace
of them. We were unable to enter the craft but it appears to be uninhabited at
the moment.  
(Lobos gets on the intercom)  
LOBOS: Commander B Division? We have uninvited visitors. How many?  
MESSENGER: Unknown, but at least three.  
LOBOS: Three or more. Organise a search then detain them for questioning.
Visitors? We won't be the only ones looking for them.  
TECHNICIAN: The rebels?  
LOBOS: Rebels? This local rabble? They're children.  
TECHNICIAN: The children, as you call them, are growing up.  
LOBOS: When they pose a danger, we will destroy them. Until then, the problem
will keep. Nevertheless, they�ll try and contact our visitors for help. I must
remember to notify the commanders to keep watch. As for the aliens who have
just landed, we may even be able to add to the museum.

**[Xeron hideout]**

(The black-clad men gather)  
SITA: Tor is late. It's not like him.  
DAKO: I know. He did contact the group in the next sector?  
SITA: Yes, but the Moroks are out checking. If they found him missing, they
could have pulled him in for questioning. Oh no, he's just been detained. Stop
worrying about it.  
DAKO: Stop worrying? Look, we're just waiting to be rounded up.  
SITA: I suppose Tor knows what he's doing.  
DAKO: Huh, does he? I'm beginning to wonder. I know the Moroks have ray guns
and we're unarmed, but our only chance is to strike. The longer we leave it,
the greater the risk.  
(enter young Jeremy Bulloch)  
TOR: But we'll only get one opportunity, Dako, and when we attack we've got to
win.  
SITA: Tor, you're late.  
TOR: I know, something's happened. The Moroks have discovered a spaceship.  
SITA: A spaceship landed here?  
DAKO: Where from?  
TOR: Nobody knows yet. They'd already left it before the ship was found.  
SITA: It doesn't make much difference. They'll contact the Moroks anyway.  
TOR: No, I don't think they will. They've had time to do that and they
haven't. Lobos is organising a search.  
SITA: A search?  
DAKO: Tor, I don't understand. Look, everybody knows what this planet's used
for. A museum. Well, if they came here knowing that, and they must have done,
it can only be to see the Moroks.  
TOR: The universe is huge. There must be millions of planets that have never
heard of the Moroks.  
SITA: They could have landed here by accident.  
TOR: Well, either way, it's our chance. Well, don't you see? They'll have
weapons, weapons we can use.  
SITA: If they agree to help us.  
TOR: They will, Sita, when they hear our story.  
DAKO: But the Moroks are searching. You've already said that. They'll find
them first.  
TOR: No, I don't think they'll want to be discovered when they find out about
this place.  
SITA: If they hide, they'll hide from us too.  
TOR: I know, but we've got to try. Come on.

**[Museum Exhibit room]**

(Ian, Barbara and Vicki are lifting the case cover off a weapon)  
IAN: Can you hold it?  
BARBARA: Yes.  
VICKI: Hurry up, it's heavy.  
(Ian gets the gun)  
IAN: All right. Hey, I wonder if it works, hey? (makes rat-a-tat noises)  
DOCTOR: Chesterton, this is no time to be playing cowboys and indians.  
IAN: Doctor, I might have shot a hole right in the middle of you.  
DOCTOR: Is that so? We have a very serious problem on our hands, and what are
you doing with this anyway? Put it back in there.  
IAN: No, Doctor, this might come in very useful. We might be able to bluff our
way out of here with this.  
BARBARA: If we want to get out of here.  
VICKI: Oh, we can't stay here, Barbara, can we?  
BARBARA: We must do whatever is necessary to keep us out of those cases.  
VICKI: I don't see that staying here would stop it.  
BARBARA: We must break the chain of events that led up to it, and going out of
here might be just what we're not supposed to do.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I think Barbara's quite right, my dear. If we walk out of here,
it could change the future. Perhaps if we wait until we're taken out, that
might change the future. The point is, what are we going to do? Which is it to
be?  
VICKI: But Doctor, if we find the Tardis and leave here, then we won't have to
worry about being turned into dummies at all.  
IAN: That's a good point, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: It isn't a good point at all, my dear boy. The fact is the future, our
future, whether we leave here in the Tardis or not.  
IAN: Yes, I see. It's a difficult problem, isn't it?  
DOCTOR: Yes, it is.  
VICKI: There's no answer. But, Doctor, we've got to decide on something.  
DOCTOR: Decide, my dear? Spinning a coin would be just as appropriate. Who
would want to put us on show or display, I wonder.  
BARBARA: The Doctor's curious. That means we stay.  
VICKI: You've lost a button.  
IAN: Oh, so I have.  
DOCTOR: Lost a button? Hmm, that's interesting. Yes, that's very interesting.  
IAN: Doctor, why do you always show the greatest interest in the least
important things?  
DOCTOR: The least important things sometimes, my dear boy, lead to the
greatest discoveries. Like steam, for instance, coming out of a kettle. Yes, I
was with him at the time. Let's see now, yes, what was that fellow's name?  
BARBARA: James Watt.  
DOCTOR: Yes, you know, losing a button could change the future. It's a pity,
my dear boy, you didn't discover it was missing in the cases when we were
standing there staring at each other.  
IAN: Doctor, I'd just come face to face with myself. I wasn't counting the
buttons on my jacket.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I quite understand that. Well, I think we should leave the
Museum, try and find the Tardis, and make sure that it doesn't end up in here.
Are you all agreeable?  
VICKI: Yes!  
IAN: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Come along, then. Come along.

**[Museum corridor]**

DOCTOR: All right, my boy. You lead the way.  
IAN: Yes. Well, which way? Have you any particular fancy?  
DOCTOR: The way we came in, of course.  
IAN: And which way was that?  
DOCTOR: Your memory is like a sieve, dear boy. We turned right and then left.  
VICKI: No, no, we turned right when we came in.  
IAN: No, we turned left when we came in.  
BARBARA: Well actually, all the doors and corridors are exactly alike.  
DOCTOR: I beg to differ, You see, you must turn right before you turn left.  
IAN: Doctor, it depends which way you're facing before you start turning at
all.  
DOCTOR: We were facing from there, down here, therefore  
IAN: Doctor, why don't you admit it. You are just as lost as the rest of us?  
DOCTOR: Yes, I suppose I must confess I am. Anyway, I suggest we take Vicki's
advice. We can always re-trace our steps. So, we go this way and turn right.
Right.  
(And off they go.)  
BARBARA: Well, I don't remember this.  
VICKI: I do.  
IAN: Oh, you're just saying that because we followed your advice.  
VICKI: Oh no, I'm not. I remember that thing being over there.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I think Vicki's quite correct. Yes, I have a distinct impression
we've all been here before. Yes, of course. Yes, yes, yes, yes, I know where
we are now.  
IAN: You do? Well, which way do we go?  
DOCTOR: Er, er  
VICKI: Straight ahead?  
DOCTOR: Straight, straight ahead, my dear boy. Straight ahead, yes, and turn
right.

**[Governor's office]**

(The intercom buzzes)  
LOBOS: Yes?  
COMMANDER [OC]: Commander K division. Alien spaceship in hand, sir.  
LOBOS: What news of the aliens? Repeat, what news of the aliens?  
COMMANDER [OC]: Footsteps were found near the Museum. The search is
proceeding.  
LOBOS: Good. Find them.

**[Museum]**

BARBARA: It's like a maze.  
IAN: Well, if we keep going, we must eventually come to an entrance.  
DOCTOR: No more talking please. I think we're nearly there.  
(Tor is coming round the corner behind them)  
DOCTOR: And remember, we can be seen by now.  
(Our group walk on)  
SITA: That must be them.  
DAKO: And they're armed!  
TOR: Quick, back here. I'll see which way they go, then we'll try and cut them
off.  
DAKO: They had a ray gun. I saw it.  
TOR: Well, that's no reason to sound downhearted. We were hoping they would.  
DAKO: Well, that's all very well but how do we know they're friendly? They
might shoot us on sight.  
TOR: Well, we'll have to try and make contact before we show ourselves.  
SITA: How?  
TOR: Well, we'll catch either the old man or the girl. We can explain and let
them introduce us to the others.  
SITA: It's a good idea.  
TOR: Look, quick, they've gone to the right. Let's get them.  
(Further on still, the Doctor stops to peer at some items on stands near a
door)  
IAN: All clear.  
VICKI: Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Hmm? Yes, yes, all right, child.  
(Vicki goes on, and the Doctor gets pulled through the door)

**[Room]**

(The Doctor is lying on the floor)  
DAKO: You've killed him, Sita.  
SITA: I couldn't have, I hardly touched him. He must have fainted.  
TOR: Shut up, both of you. There's no time for arguments.  
(We see that the Doctor's faking it)  
TOR: Stay here and watch him, Dako, in case he recovers.  
DAKO: Me? Where are you going?  
TOR: To try and find something to bring him around. Well, don't worry, we
won't be long. Come on, Sita.

**[Museum]**

BARBARA: Well, he was following us.  
IAN: I know that, but where did he stop? Well, surely one or other of you saw
or heard something?  
BARBARA: Oh, come on, Ian. You weren't that far in front.  
IAN: Barbara, I am not blaming you.  
BARBARA: Well then, stop getting irritable.  
IAN: I am not irritable! I. Oh, I'm sorry. Of course I'm irritable. I just
wish he'd stay with us for once, that's all.  
BARBARA: He was looking in one of the cases. I suppose we could have left him
behind.  
VICKI: I bet he's been captured.  
IAN: Captured.  
BARBARA: By whom?  
VICKI: I don't know. Those people we saw, I suppose.  
BARBARA: Oh, Vicki, you're just letting your imagination run away with you.  
IAN: There were four of us in those cases, not one.  
BARBARA: Well, what do we do now? Which is the way into those cases? Staying
here, going back, or still trying to find our way out?  
IAN: Oh, Barbara, asking a lot of questions is not going to change our future.  
BARBARA: Well, if we don't find a few answers, we won't have a future.  
IAN: All right, all right, I agree we've got to do something. I say we go on.  
BARBARA: All right.  
VICKI: Oh, good. That way I think.

**[Room]**

(Tor and Sita return with a glass of water to find Dako bound and gagged)  
TOR: Well, what happened, Dako?  
DAKO: I don't know. I turned my back for a second, the next thing I  
TOR: Well, was it the old man?  
DAKO: I don't know.  
SITA: Did he go outside?  
DAKO: I keep telling you. I didn't see anything. One minute was silence and
the next minute a whirlwind hit me.  
TOR: He must have gone to join the others. We'll have to see if we can find
him.  
SITA: Don't forget they're still armed.  
TOR: Oh, we'll have to take our chance this time, otherwise the Moroks will
get them first. Come on.  
DOCTOR: (inside the Dalek.) I fooled them all! I am the master!

**[Museum]**

(The Doctor comes out of the Dalek room still chuckling, and is promptly
captured by two Morok guards)

**[Museum Exhibit room]**

BARBARA: It's no good Ian, I can't go on. We passed this thing ages ago. We're
just going round and round in circles.  
VICKI: How long have we been in here?  
IAN: Oh, it doesn't matter how long. There's only one thing that's certain.
We're getting nearer and nearer to those cases. The Minotaur.  
VICKI: Where?  
IAN: The Minotaur!  
(Ian pulls Barbara's cardigan off her)  
BARBARA: Ian, what are you doing?  
IAN: Don't you two remember your mythology? When Theseus went into the
labyrinth, he took with him a ball of thread so that he could use it to
retrace his steps.  
BARBARA: Yes, but Ian, we haven't just arrived. We've been here for hours.  
IAN: That doesn't matter. From now on we won't go round and round in circles.
Here Vicki, hold it. Come on.  
(Ian starts tugging at Barbara's cardigan)  
BARBARA: Well, you might ask. I mean, that's a good cardigan.  
IAN: Oh, er, sorry. Well, may we?  
BARBARA: Yes, yes, I suppose so.  
VICKI: We'll leave a trail of thread, you see? But Ian, Ian, if anyone sees
it, they'll be able to follow it and catch us.  
IAN: Oh, we'll get caught anyway if we don't get out of here soon. Don't worry
about that. Let's get this  
VICKI: I suppose so.  
IAN: How do you undo this?  
BARBARA: Oh, give it to me. Do you have a penknife?  
IAN: Oh, penknife. Yes, there we are.  
(And Barbara carefully unpicks the finish of the knitting)  
IAN: Ah, yes.

**[Cell]**

(The Doctor explores the blank wall of the room then sits in a perspex chair.
A metal band comes around his middle, trapping him.)

**[Museum]**

(The Xerons have found the thread)  
SITA: What's this?  
TOR: They're leaving a trail.  
SITA: Why?  
TOR: Well, they must have missed the old man. Yes, this was put here for him
to follow them.  
DAKO: No, I don't think so. They'd have come back and looked for him.  
TOR: Well, whatever the reason, it's a trail, and trails are meant to be
followed. This way.

**[Cell]**

(a wall slides back to reveal Lobos behind a table)  
LOBOS: Welcome to Xeros, a planet in the Morok empire. What is your name?  
(The Doctor stays silent)  
LOBOS: Very well. Mine is Lobos. I am the governor of this planet.  
DOCTOR: Curator of a Museum is a better title.  
LOBOS: Ah, so now you choose to speak. Good. Yes, Xeros is a museum. A lasting
memorial to the achievements of the Morok civilisation.  
DOCTOR: Really? Well, from my observation it seems to arouse very little
interest.  
LOBOS: People tire of their heritage. Three hundred mimmians ago, sightseers
filled this planet, marvelling at what they saw. Today, the occasional
spaceship from Morok calls.  
DOCTOR: Perhaps if you reduced the price of admission?  
LOBOS: You have a sense of humour too. Unfortunately, that is not the reason.
Our civilisation rests on its laurels. Galactic conquests are a thing of the
past. Life, it is now said, is purely a thing to enjoy.  
DOCTOR: Decline and fall of the Roman empire. Oh yes, it's happened before,
yes. In many galaxies far beyond your reach.  
LOBOS: Why do you come here?  
DOCTOR: Exploration.  
LOBOS: Oh? Then you are a scientist like myself. It makes a change to have
someone intelligent and enquiring to talk to.  
DOCTOR: I'm charmed.  
LOBOS: Where have you come from?  
DOCTOR: Why?  
LOBOS: You don't want to answer. Very well, I'll try another. Where are your
companions? We can get all the information we require without the need to
resort to brute force. Of course, your cooperation would have made things
easier, but it isn't essential. I will repeat the question. Where are your
companions?  
(Lobos looks at a small monitor on his desk then opens the intercom.)  
LOBOS: Commander B division?  
COMMANDER [OC]: B Division. Commander here, sir.  
LOBOS: Proceed immediately to corridor 417. Detain three humans. One man, one
woman and a young girl.  
COMMANDER [OC]: Message received and understood. It will be dealt with
immediately.  
(Lobos turns the monitor so the Doctor can see it)  
LOBOS: A simple matter of thought selection. By asking a question, I plant an
image in your mind. No matter what you say, as long as you're seated in that
chair, I will see your mental pictures reflected. You see, it is quite useless
for you to lie to me. Now shall we return to the questioning? How did you get
here?  
(a penny-farthing bicycle)

**[Museum]**

IAN: The end, I'm afraid.  
BARBARA: It didn't work, did it?  
IAN: Oh, I don't know. We didn't go round and round in circles, we didn't
back-track.  
VICKI: If only they had exit signs like they do in ordinary museums.  
BARBARA: Well, I suppose we'll be stuck here until. May be the Doctor's wrong
and you can't change the future.  
VICKI: Oh, don't say that, Barbara. I can't bear to think of such an awful
thing happening.  
BARBARA: Well, I can't bear to think of it either, but we can't  
IAN: It didn't work, eh? You come with me.  
(Ian proudly opens a pair of doors and - )  
VICKI: The Tardis! They've got the Tardis!

**[Cell]**

DOCTOR: Well? No more questions?  
LOBOS: Where have you come from?!  
DOCTOR: If you take a look into your screen, perhaps you will find that out?  
(walruses swimming)  
LOBOS: What are these creatures?  
DOCTOR: Just some old friends of mine.  
LOBOS: But these are amphibious creatures. You are not an amphibian.  
DOCTOR: Oh, I'm not, am I?  
(the Doctor dressed in Edwardian bathing costume and straw boater)  
LOBOS: Yes?  
COMMANDER [OC]: Commander B division. No fugitive aliens in corridor 417\.  
LOBOS: You fools, you let them escape. All available divisions. Priority
search. These aliens must be found at once. Maximum security.  
DOCTOR: Don't blame your men. I think my friends most probably left the area
long before you put questions to me. I imagined them still there, of course,
because that was the last place I saw them. So you see, your little toy isn't
infallible, is it?  
LOBOS: So you see fit to joke with me, eh? Well, let us give you something to
joke about, shall we? You are of no further use to me and would make a perfect
specimen for our museums. Yes, Doctor, I see you take my meaning. Guards. Take
him to the preparation room.

__**Episode Three - The Search**__

**[Outside the Museum]**

(Two Moroks are guarding the Tardis with four Xerons looking at it)  
GUARD: Leave it alone.

**[Museum corridor]**

(Looking through slightly open doors)  
IAN: It didn't take them long to find it.  
BARBARA: Well, I hope they don't do any damage.  
IAN: Well, there's nothing they can do unless they get inside.  
VICKI: Are they bringing it in here?  
IAN: No, it doesn't look like it. Take a look for yourself, Vicki. Well, what
do we do now? Find the Doctor, I suppose. I'm afraid I'm no great expert when
it comes to changing the future.  
VICKI: I think one of us should keep watch on the Tardis. If we want to leave
here in a hurry we don't want to waste time looking for it.  
BARBARA: Well, we know where it's going, Vicki, we've already seen it.  
VICKI: Well if it gets there, we needn't bother. We won't have changed what's
going to happen in the future.  
IAN: Oh, this whole thing is becoming a nightmare.  
BARBARA: It's been a nightmare ever since we saw those cases. But all we do is
stand around saying this whole thing is a nightmare. Why don't we do
something?  
IAN: Choice is only possible when you know all the facts. Don't you realise?
We know nothing about this place.  
BARBARA: Shh! Listen!

**[Outside the Museum]**

COMMANDER: Keep clear! Move! Move!  
(The Xerons leave)  
COMMANDER: Is there no way in?  
GUARD: No, Commander.  
COMMANDER: That's all I need. You know what Lobos will say about that,
soldier. He will blame me. Everything that goes wrong on this wretched planet
is my fault. Think yourselves lucky that you have me between you and our
illustrious Governor. A scapegoat, and for what? For this rank and a meagre
pittance of extra pay. Oh, what's the use.  
LOBOS: A strange looking craft. It must be very cramped and uncomfortable for
four travellers inside at one time.  
COMMANDER: Yes.  
LOBOS: This door is locked.  
COMMANDER: We could not gain entry, sir.  
LOBOS: Didn't they leave you the key? Force it open, you fool!  
COMMANDER: Why was not the cutting equipment bought to me? I asked you to
bring it several times, didn't I, soldier? Now don't you give me any of your
feeble excuses. I will deal with you later. Get it! Incompetent fools. Have
any of the aliens been caught, sir?  
LOBOS: One has.

**[Museum]**

LOBOS [OC]: Three are still at large.  
IAN: Did you hear that?  
BARBARA: Yes. Shh!

**[Outside the Museum]**

COMMANDER: They could be in a thousand places.  
LOBOS: Then I expect a thousand places to be searched. When this is over,
discipline will be tightened. The army here's gone soft. I'm supposed to have
at my command trained soldiers, not a feeble bunch of half witted amateurs.

**[Museum]**

BARBARA: They've stopped talking.  
VICKI: Maybe they've gone.  
GUARD: Stay as you are! You! You with the gun - bring it to me! Now careful.  
(Vicki hands over the weapon)  
GUARD: Don't move!  
(Ian steps forward)  
BARBARA: Don't! He'll fire that thing.  
IAN: Well? Wouldn't that change the shape of things to come?  
BARBARA: Well, it would for you. You'd be dead.  
IAN: They can't kill us. We're going to end up in those cases.  
BARBARA: Not necessarily. Oh, you can change the future so that we don't end
up in those cases, but if we're all dead, what's the point?  
IAN: But that means we can't fight against anybody. We don't know what we're
doing.  
VICKI: We've just lost the Doctor. Has that already changed the future?  
BARBARA: We don't know Vicki. Maybe that's the way it happened. We've no
reason to suppose that we all ended up in the cases at exactly the same time.  
VICKI: So we could be doing exactly what we're supposed to do.  
IAN: I've had enough of this. Now listen, we're going to deal with him, and
then we're going after the Doctor, whether we're supposed to or not.  
GUARD: That's enough talking. Come on, move out slowly.  
BARBARA: Be careful.  
IAN: Don't worry. I'm going to try something.  
GUARD: I said, move out.  
(Ian moves slowly towards the guard)  
IAN: Yes, we heard you the first time, but we don't feel like moving, do we?  
VICKI: No, definitely not.  
BARBARA: Ian, don't go too far.  
IAN: Now, what were you orders? To capture us? To bring us in?  
GUARD: Yes, get back. Back.  
IAN: There was nothing about killing us, was there? Well, was there? Well,
answer me?  
GUARD: No. No, no, there wasn't.  
IAN: Well, think what your superiors are going to say. They're going to ask,
did you bring in the aliens? No, you're going to reply, I went out and shot
them all.  
(Ian tackles the guard)  
IAN: Now, run, both of you.  
VICKI: Ian! Come on!

**[Outside the Museum]**

LOBOS: Open those doors! Open them!

**[Museum]**

IAN: Vicki!  
(Vicki and Barbara scatter)  
LOBOS: Get after those women!  
COMMANDER: Guards! With me!  
LOBOS: Take him to my office. Wait for me there. Guards! Guards!

**[Outside the Museum]**

(After a big struggle, Ian knocks out the two guards and runs off)

**[Storeroom]**

BARBARA: Vicki!  
(There's a spooky pair of dummies in there. A guard comes in and Barbara hides
behind a cupboard)  
COMMANDER [OC]: One of them came this way!  
GUARD: No, sir.  
COMMANDER: Come, come.  
(Barbara discovers that the guard has locked the door behind him)

**[Museum]**

(Vicki is abducted by the Xerons)

**[Room]**

VICKI: Let me go! Let go of me!  
TOR: Quiet, they'll hear. Look, you've got to trust us!  
VICKI: Why should I?  
TOR: We hate the Moroks. We want to see them dead. Well, you can see we're
nothing like them.  
VICKI: Who are you?  
TOR: Well, we'll explain everything later. First of all, we must find your
companions.  
VICKI: It was you who took the Doctor, like you took me. The old man who was
with us.  
TOR: Well, yes, but. We did but he fooled us. Then the Moroks caught him. Oh,
we didn't hand him over to them if that's what you're thinking. Now where are
the others?  
VICKI: I think they caught Ian.  
TOR: The man? What of the woman?  
VICKI: We ran so quickly, we went in opposite directions. I couldn't turn back
when I realised because the guards were already behind me.  
TOR: She must be making for the storerooms. We'll have to wait at the
headquarters. Dako?  
DAKO: Yes?  
TOR: Go and see if you can find her and bring her there. What's her name?  
VICKI: Barbara.  
TOR: Go quickly!  
(Dako leaves)

**[Outside the Museum]**

LOBOS: You fools. You let them escape.  
GUARD: Yes sir.  
LOBOS: Well there are other ways of getting them out. Withdraw our men from
this building. Have all exits guarded and have this rest search the area for
the one these fools allowed to escape.  
GUARD: Sir.  
(Guard 1 leaves)  
LOBOS: You remain here.  
(Lobos leaves)  
(Ian comes from behind the Tardis and throws a stone)  
GUARD 2: Who's there?  
(Ian jumps him from behind and disarms him)  
GUARD 2: No, no, no, don't kill me! No!  
IAN: That depends on you. I want the answers to some questions.  
GUARD 2: If I can help you, I will. I promise.  
IAN: A friend of mine, an old man. He's been captured. Now what's happened to
him?  
GUARD 2: I don't know. I don't know.  
IAN: Is he dead?  
GUARD 2: No! No!  
IAN: Where is he?  
GUARD 2: They took him to the preparation room, but it's nothing to do with
me. I'm just a simple soldier.  
IAN: What happens there? I said, what happens there?  
GUARD 2: He'll be got ready for the Museum. But you can't help him. Once the
process starts  
IAN: What process?  
GUARD 2: Well, it's a kind of embalming.  
IAN: How long's it take?  
GUARD 2: Well, several hours, but  
IAN: Take me there.  
GUARD 2: Well, you'll be killed.  
IAN: Take me!  
GUARD 2: We'll both be killed!

**[Governor's office]**

LOBOS: A directive from Morok. They think we made a mistake in allowing the
Xeron youth to live. They are almost men and dangerous. These aliens, they've
made fools of us! (into the intercom) Building 6-2? The ventilation is
standard?  
GUARD [OC]: Yes sir.  
LOBOS: Good, it won't take the guards long to withdraw. In one hour the air is
to be replaced with Zaphra gas, is that clear?  
GUARD [OC]: Perfectly.  
LOBOS: Then see that my order is carried out.  
COMMANDER: Zaphra gas.  
LOBOS: It is very effective. If the two women do not leave the building and
surrender to the guards, the gas will eventually paralyse them.

**[Storeroom]**

(Barbara gives up trying to jemmy the door with a piece of wood, and has been
dozing when a figure enters. She raises a piece of wood)  
DAKO: Barbara? Are you in here?  
BARBARA: Who are you? How do you know my name?

**[Outside the Museum]**

TOR: There's no guard here. Hurry!  
VICKI: Can't we wait for Barbara?  
TOR: Oh no, it's too dangerous. Dako will find her and bring her to the
hideout.  
SITA: Now, quickly!

**[Storeroom]**

DAKO: Tor and Sita have taken Vicki to our headquarters. You must believe me.
We are your friends.  
BARBARA: Why should you be?  
DAKO: We're Xerons. This is our planet.  
BARBARA: And the others? The ones in uniform?  
DAKO: Moroks. They've changed our planet into a Museum. A record of their
wars. But soon we shall rise against them and drive them from Xeros.  
BARBARA: Moroks? Well, where did they come from?  
DAKO: Their planet is three light years away. They invaded us without warning.
Xeros was a place of peace and knowledge and the wisdom of our elders made us
free from want.  
BARBARA: Well, why didn't you fight back?  
DAKO: Their weapons were far superior to ours. We had planned for peace and
they for war. Now I want you to come with me.  
BARBARA: Well, can you get us out of here?  
DAKO: There are many guards but I'll find a way. Come on.  
(gas starts pouring in)  
BARBARA: Look!  
DAKO: They've set the museum on fire!  
BARBARA: That isn't smoke, it's gas. Put something over your mouth.

**[Xeron hideout]**

(sharing a meal)  
VICKI: So then what happened, after the Moroks had captured the planet?  
TOR: They destroyed everything, even our people. Only the children were
spared, to work.  
VICKI: How horrible.  
TOR: We are a slave race. When we grow older we are taken to other planets.
Sita, Dako and myself were due to go. That is why we hide here and plan.  
SITA: But although we have sworn to drive the Moroks from Xeros, it will not
be easy. The life they impose on us makes organisation difficult.  
VICKI: But there don't seem to be many Moroks. Surely you must outnumber them?  
TOR: It is unpleasant to admit but our opposition is weak and unarmed. Well, a
very small army can easily keep control.  
VICKI: But you're supposed to be planning a revolution!  
TOR: Why did you and your friends comes to Xeros?  
VICKI: We. It was an accident.  
TOR: Of course. No one would come to Xeros from choice. The Moroks reputation
is universal.  
SITA: It's late. I'm sure Dako and your friend Barbara, have been captured.  
TOR: Well, they need time to dodge the guards.  
SITA: All this time? We'd be fooling ourselves to believe otherwise.  
VICKI: Well, you can't just accept it. We've got to help them. Well, sitting
here planning and dreaming of a revolution isn't going to win your planet
back.  
SITA: We do all we can.  
VICKI: By making a nuisance of yourselves, that's all it is.  
TOR: What can we do without weapons?  
VICKI: Nothing. We must get some.  
SITA: Ha! Now who's dreaming?  
VICKI: The Moroks are armed.  
SITA: So we take them from the Moroks.  
VICKI: Why not? That is revolution.  
TOR: Vicki, we have tried. Occasionally we have overpowered a guard and taken
his ray gun. But what can one gun do against even a small army?  
SITA: And when we do that they take hostages until the gun is returned.  
VICKI: Where are the guns kept?  
TOR: Well, at the armoury.  
VICKI: If you had guns, lots of them, could you organise your friends?
Distribute the arms and really wage a war?  
TOR: Of course. That is where we are strong, in our planning.  
SITA: But the armoury is out of our reach.  
VICKI: Don't you know where it is?  
TOR: Oh, we know, but its key is something that we could never obtain.  
VICKI: Oh, I don't understand.  
TOR: The armaments are kept behind locked doors. An impregnable safe.  
VICKI: What kind of lock does it have?  
TOR: An electronic brain programmed to ask questions. The answers given open
the door. But they only open to the truth.  
VICKI: A sort of lie detector. If I could see it, maybe I could. Well, I'd
just like to see it.  
TOR: We can take you.  
SITA: But why are you so interested in this, Vicki? Why do you want this
revolution so much?  
VICKI: I've as many reasons as you, perhaps more, for wanting to see the
future changed. Perhaps I'll explain later but I think we should go now.

**[Morok headquarters]**

IAN: What's wrong?  
GUARD 2: This is the building.  
IAN: Well, take me in.  
GUARD 2: It would be better to wait. It's a busy time of day. Later on there
won't be so many guards on duty. You'll stand a better chance.  
IAN: There's someone coming. Now find out what happened to the others, and
remember, I'm here.  
(Ian conceals himself)  
COMMANDER: Soldier! What are you doing here, soldier? Why have you left your
post?  
GUARD 2: The governor sent for me. I am to report to him.  
COMMANDER: You didn't leave it unguarded, did you?  
GUARD 2: The replacement hadn't arrived. But the Governor's orders. He said
immediately.  
COMMANDER: Then why are you waiting? I will attend to your replacement.  
GUARD 2: Sir?  
COMMANDER: What is it now, soldier?  
GUARD 2: Have the aliens been recaptured?  
COMMANDER: Not yet, but the Zaphra gas will soon drive them from their hiding
place.  
(The Commander leaves)  
IAN: You did well. We'll take your advice and wait a while. Over there.

**[Armoury]**

(Tor grabs the guard and Sita knocks him out.)  
TOR: Well, this is the armoury, Vicki.  
VICKI: These must be the light beams.  
SITA: Yes.  
(Vicki examines the computers)  
SITA: Can you do anything? Do you know how it works?  
VICKI: It must work to a standard pattern. Break the light beam.  
TOR: But the questions will start.  
VICKI: Yes, I know.  
COMPUTER: Do you understand that all questions are to be fully answered?  
SITA: Yes.  
COMPUTER: What is your rank?  
SITA: I have no rank.  
TOR: You see Vicki? Not only does the reply have to be true, it has to be the
correct answer as well.  
VICKI: Yes. Sita, break the light beam again but this time don't answer. Just
let the questions run right through.  
COMPUTER: Do you understand that all questions are to be fully answered? What
is your rank? What is your name? Do you have the Governor's permission to
approach? Have you a requisition signed by the Governor? What is its reference
number?  
TOR: Withdrawal requisition numbers are fed in from headquarters. It has to
tally with the number given. There's no chance, Vicki.  
COMPUTER: Which unit are you attached to?  
VICKI: Isn't there? I wouldn't give in as easily as that.  
COMPUTER: For what purpose are the arms needed?  
VICKI: Look, now this is where the questions are recorded.  
COMPUTER: Has the guard on duty examined your identification papers?  
VICKI: Help me get the front off.  
COMPUTER: What is the current password?

**[Governor's office]**

LOBOS: Are the aliens still in the building?  
GUARD [OC]: Yes sir. We have seen no movement.  
LOBOS: Very well. Keep the men alerted. They'll soon be coming out.

**[Museum]**

BARBARA: We're almost there, Dako.  
(Dako collapses)  
BARBARA: Dako, come on. Come on.  
(Barbara collapses)

**[Armoury]**

TOR: Have you done it?  
VICKI: I'm not sure. I think so.  
TOR: Well, the door hasn't opened.  
VICKI: You've got to answer the questions yet.  
TOR: Well then you've failed. The lock reacts only to the truth.  
VICKI: And it still does, Tor. You'll see.  
COMPUTER: What is your name?  
VICKI: Vicki.  
COMPUTER: For what purpose are the arms needed?  
VICKI: Revolution.  
(and the door opens)  
TOR: Well done, Vicki!  
VICKI: I fixed it so that I only had to answer the truth. I didn't have to
give the correct reply.  
SITA: There's everything we need here and more. We'll be able to arm
everybody.  
TOR: Oh good! Get as many as you can carry and give them to Sham for
distribution. I'll give mine to the Tolma Corrin and bring them back here for
more.  
VICKI: I wonder if this will keep us out of the cases.

**[Governor's office]**

LOBOS: Come in.  
(Ian and Guard 2 enter)  
LOBOS: Well. At last. You aliens have caused me enough trouble. I shall see
that you pay for it.  
(Ian produces the gun)  
LOBOS: You'll be a fool if you kill me. You will achieve nothing.  
IAN: Possibly, but it might be enjoyable.  
LOBOS: What do you want?  
IAN: Take me to the Doctor. The old man you captured.  
LOBOS: And if I refuse?  
IAN: I don't think you'll be that stupid.  
LOBOS: You'll kill me anyway.  
IAN: You're wasting time.  
LOBOS: Am I? It is too late for you to help him. He has already passed into
the second stage of preparation.  
IAN: And what does that mean?  
LOBOS: He is beyond your help.  
IAN: Come on! Take me to him! Move! Hurry!  
LOBOS: Hurrying won't help your friend, the Doctor.  
IAN: Is he in there?  
LOBOS: Yes.  
IAN: Open the door.  
(The guard does so)  
IAN: Now get in, both of you.

**[Preparation room]**

IAN: Doctor!

__**Episode Four - The Final Phase**__

**[Preparation room]**

(The Doctor is propped upright against a board, unconscious. He has tubes
going from him to a dome-shaped device in the room.)  
IAN: What have you done to him?  
LOBOS: I don't think you would appreciate the technical difficulties.  
IAN: Just tell me what you've done.  
LOBOS: He has completed the second stage of preparation. He's as good as dead.  
IAN: If you want to save yourself, you'd better bring him back to life.  
LOBOS: Impossible.  
IAN: But your only hope is to try.  
LOBOS: No one has ever attempted to reverse the process.  
IAN: There's a first time for everything, now get moving!  
(Ian spots and removes Lobos' weapon)  
IAN: And remember, I shall be watching you very carefully, so don't try any
tricks.  
LOBOS: There are no tricks in science, only facts.  
(Lobos starts flicking switches)  
IAN: How long is this going to take?  
LOBOS: How can I say? This has never been done before. Perhaps he never will
recover.

**[Xeron hideout]**

(Sita is handing out guns to the motley bunch of young rebels)  
SITA: That's nearly the lot.  
TOR: Right, move along. Hurry up.  
VICKI: Tor?  
TOR: Just a minute, Vicki. Right, now you know the main objective. The Morok
barracks. Most of our force is already on the way there. But we must surprise
them. If they mobilise, we shall fail.  
SITA: Come on, take a ray gun.  
VICKI: Tor, will everybody be going to the barracks?  
TOR: Well, we need every man and woman we can muster, Vicki. Why?  
VICKI: Well if it's all the same to you, I'm going back to the museum.  
TOR: The museum?  
VICKI: Barbara may still be there. I've got to find her, Tor, and my other
friends.  
TOR: Look, after we've finished here, you can  
VICKI: Now! It may be too late then.  
TOR: I won't let you go.  
VICKI: I won't let you stop me.  
TOR: But if you're captured?  
VICKI: The Moroks don't know of the revolt. I'm not likely to tell them.  
TOR: Well you won't have to, The gun will give us away. They'll check the
armoury.  
(she gives the gun to him)  
VICKI: I'm still going. Look, Tor, I've got to find them and tell them what's
going on. There's no knowing what they'll do otherwise. If I am captured, I'll
just have to hope that you're successful and you find me in time. I know it
sounds silly but whatever I do may be wrong. I've got to find them.  
TOR: Vicki.  
VICKI: Yes?  
TOR: Wait a moment. Sita? Go with Vicki to the Museum. I'll join you later.  
SITA: Yes, but  
TOR: Don't argue, Sita. (he gives Vicki the gun back) Do what she tells you.  
VICKI: Come on, Sita.

**[Outside the Museum]**

(the cutting equipment has arrived)  
COMMANDER: Soldier! Leave that. Where is the relief guard for this entrance?  
GUARD: There was no one here when we arrived, sir.  
COMMANDER: You, take over the watch.  
GUARD: Sir!  
COMMANDER: You two come with me. I'll get to the bottom of this.

**[Museum]**

(Barbara gets up in the gas-filled corridor)  
BARBARA: Dako! Dako! Come on!  
(She helps him up and puts a handkerchief over his mouth.)  
BARBARA: Here.

**[Preparation room]**

IAN: Well, what's happening?  
LOBOS: His temperature is returning to normal.  
IAN: Good. Can't you speed things up a bit?  
LOBOS: After a temperature of several hundred degrees below freezing, it is a
complicated process. You will have to be patient.  
(The machine stops making a noise)  
LOBOS: Body temperature has now been reached.  
(Ian feels the Doctor's forehead)  
LOBOS: Well?  
IAN: Yes. He's getting warmer.  
LOBOS: Good. We shan't have long to wait.  
DOCTOR: Ahh!  
IAN: Get back!  
DOCTOR: (waking and groaning) Support me, dear boy. Support me over there and
sit me down.  
(The Doctor sits, groaning)  
IAN: How are you feeling?  
DOCTOR: I shall be all right in a minute. It's a bad attack of rheumatism.
Yes, it always happens to me when I'm cold.  
IAN: You've been cold all right, Doctor, I can tell you that.  
DOCTOR: Yes, unfortunately, I'm not used to being subjected to such low
temperatures.  
LOBOS: (to guard) When I give you the word, you rush him.  
IAN: No, well, we'd better bring the circulation back.  
LOBOS: That's an order.  
DOCTOR: It's all right, dear boy. It's not, it's not the circulation freeze.  
IAN: Eh?  
DOCTOR: Yes, don't fuss. Now don't do that.  
LOBOS: Now!  
(But the guard gets one of the guns jabbed into his chest)  
DOCTOR: My dear Governor, my dear Lobos, I don't think your soldiers have
really got their heart in their job, have they? Thank you for getting me out
of this little predicament. Although, I would have been better pleased had you
done it more voluntary.  
IAN: Yes, his conscience did need reminding.  
DOCTOR: Yes. I know, I know.  
IAN: What do you mean you know? Surely you were  
DOCTOR: Dead? Not at all, my boy. Not at all. I was merely, let me say, frozen
stiff?  
IAN: You mean you knew everything that was happening?  
DOCTOR: Exactly! My brain was working with the speed of a mechanical computer.
I was asking myself questions and the answers were arriving with remarkable
alacrity. Yes, yes. I must confess, I didn't enjoy the refrigeration, hence
this attack of rheumatism. But thanks to you, my dear boy, I am now de-iced
and I think I'm quite capable of facing up to the climate once more.  
LOBOS: I wouldn't be too sure of that, Doctor. Of course, I have no proof, but
your brain could very easily have been affected.  
DOCTOR: The best thing for you, Governor Lobos, is to put you in there. Then
you will have all the proof you needed. But you think yourself lucky. My
conscience won't allow me to do that. It's a pity, isn't it? It's a pity!

**[Governor's office]**

(The Commander and the two guards enter the office and overhear the
conversation in the Preparation room)  
IAN [OC]: Well Doctor, I think the next thing to do is find Barbara and Vicki,
eh?  
DOCTOR [OC]: I'm not so sure of that, my dear boy. Where did you say you'd
left them?  
IAN [OC]: In the Museum.  
DOCTOR [OC]: And the Tardis?  
IAN [OC]: Well, that was outside the Museum building.  
DOCTOR: Hmm. I see, I see.

**[Preparation room]**

IAN: What's the problem? Surely we've changed the future by now?  
DOCTOR: Yes, and I'm not sure of that either, Chesterton. Have we? Have we? Or
are we doing what we're allegedly intended to do? Now, what do you think?  
IAN: Well, I got you out of that thing, I  
DOCTOR: Yes, that's true.

**[Governor's office]**

DOCTOR: That's true, but I'm sure the Governor here would be delighted if we
were both put back in there.

**[Preparation room]**

(The Commander and guards sneak up behind the Doctor and Ian)  
DOCTOR: Am I correct, sir?  
(A guard knocks Ian out. The Doctor turns and sees a gun pointed at him)  
LOBOS: Yes, Doctor. You are quite correct. And it would appear that I shall
have my wish.

**[Museum]**

BARBARA: There's only a few more feet, Dako.  
DAKO: (coughing) There'll be guards out there, Barbara. Waiting for us.  
BARBARA: You'll stand a better chance outside.  
DAKO: A chance of what?

**[Outside the Museum]**

(The guard spots them through the crack in the main doors, and draws his
weapon)

**[Governor's office]**

COMMANDER: I met this soldier on his way here, asked him what he was doing. He
said reporting to you on your orders.  
GUARD: I was a prisoner of one of the aliens, sir. He had a gun.  
LOBOS: Which he took from you.  
GUARD: Yes, sir.  
COMMANDER: I posted a relief guard and then came back here to see what was
happening.  
LOBOS: You did well, Commander. Have this man placed under close arrest.  
(The intercom buzzes)  
LOBOS: Yes?  
GUARD [OC]: Relief guard, exit 4-1-7. The aliens are just about to leave the
museum.  
LOBOS: Good. Detain them there. I'll send extra men.  
GUARD [OC]: Yes sir.  
LOBOS: Well, it would appear that this little diversion will soon be over,
Commander.  
(Flicks his intercom switches)  
LOBOS: Strange, no reply from the barracks. Well, it seems that a faulty
connection has given our friend here another chance. Go with the Commander.
When you've got them, bring the aliens to me.  
COMMANDER: Yes sir.

**[Preparation room]**

LOBOS: I've just a word about your friends. You'll all be together again soon.
Perhaps for centuries?

**[Outside the Museum]**

(Barbara and Dako tumble out of the smoke-filled Museum)  
GUARD: Halt! Halt! Stay as you are. Over to the wall. Over!  
DAKO: Sorry, Barbara.  
BARBARA: It's all right. Wasn't your fault.  
GUARD: No talking. Hands on your heads. Up! Up!  
SITA: Soldier!  
(Sita shoots the guard)  
BARBARA: Vicki!  
VICKI: Barbara! Are you all right? You look terrible.  
BARBARA: No, I'm fine.  
DAKO: Sita! Where did you come from? And guns!  
SITA: Yes, the revolution's finally started. We broke into the armoury. Tor is
leading an attack on the Morok barracks.  
DAKO: Well, why aren't you there?  
SITA: We came for you.  
VICKI: Is Ian still inside?  
BARBARA: Well, I don't see how he could be. I think he must have been captured
by the guards.  
VICKI: Taken to wherever the Doctor is, I suppose. Oh, Barbara, we've got to
find them. We've got a chance now.  
BARBARA: Why? What's happened?  
VICKI: Everything's going to be all right, I know it is. When the revolution
succeeds, Tor and the Xerons are going to destroy this Museum and all the
exhibits. Well, we can't be put in a museum that doesn't exist any more, can
we?  
SITA: Dako and myself are going to try and see if we can find Tor. Are you
coming?  
VICKI: No, I don't think so, are we, Barbara.  
BARBARA: Well, we must find out where Ian and the Doctor were taken. And if
that means just wandering around the exhibition aimlessly, well, we may as
well go with them, Tor.  
VICKI: Where will they be taken?  
SITA: The Governor's office, I expect. First of all, anyway.  
VICKI: We don't want to go there, do we?  
COMMANDER: Possibly not, but that's where you are going.  
(The Moroks shoot Sita and Dako)  
VICKI: Sita.  
COMMANDER: (taking Vicki's gun) Where did you get this? I asked you a
question.  
VICKI: I, I can't remember.  
COMMANDER: Soldier. Have their been any guerilla actions against us?  
GUARD: None recently.  
COMMANDER: Have any arms fallen into Xeron hands?  
GUARD: No, sir, not that I know of.  
COMMANDER: It seems as though our illustrious Governor is going to have more
than his usual batch of questions to ask. Move.

**[Governor's office]**

(Lobos is still flicking intercom switches)  
COMMANDER: No answer.  
LOBOS: No. First the barracks, now the armoury. Well, the soldier will report
as soon as he gets there.  
COMMANDER: Yes, sir. You don't think  
LOBOS: I don't think anything, Commander. All I know is that this gun came
from the weapons store.  
COMMANDER: What is going to happen to them?  
LOBOS: In due course they will go into the museum, as planned.

**[Preparation room]**

(Everyone is locked in the room, and Ian is testing the door)  
DOCTOR: Chesterton, Chesterton. Save your strength. It'll take much more than
that to get us out of this situation.  
IAN: Well, exhibits in a forgotten museum, eh? Is that how we're all going to
end up? Not with this apparatus.  
(Ian rips a piece of the dome contraption and stamps on it)  
DOCTOR: Well, my boy, you'd hardly call me a pessimist, but I think it's most
unlikely that that is the only contraption of its kind.  
BARBARA: Well, you can't blame Ian for letting off steam, Doctor. Oh, I wish
I'd had thought of it. I'd have smashed the whole thing too.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I think I would have done the same thing.  
VICKI: But we must have changed the future! We just must have done!  
BARBARA: Must we Vicki? Or were all the things that happened planned out for
us? Four separate journeys. Four choices, that led all the time, closer to
here. Maybe it could have changed things if I hadn't left that Museum.  
DOCTOR: Yes, and perhaps I shouldn't have got myself captured.  
IAN: Well, if your all joining in, I suppose I. Oh, what's the use.  
VICKI: It hasn't happened yet, you know.  
DOCTOR: Yes, Vicki's quite right. Quite right.  
IAN: It's only a matter of time, isn't it, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Well, it's not necessarily, my boy.  
BARBARA: But Doctor, what can we do now to  
DOCTOR: My dear Barbara, you must try and remember, the short time we've been
on this planet, we've met people, spoken to them and who knows, we might have
even influenced them.  
VICKI: That's what I was trying to say, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I knew you were, child, yes. Yes, I knew you were.  
IAN: You mean we don't necessarily have to change our own future. It could be
changed for us.  
DOCTOR: Quite so, yes, quite so, my boy.  
VICKI: Like the revolution.

**[Outside the Museum]**

(Guards see Sita and Dako lying on the ground by the open Museum door)  
GUARD: To headquarters, quickly! Look out!  
(But they're ambushed by Tor and his men. Another guard tries to jump Tor but
gets shaken off and shot)

**[Museum]**

(Two Xerons chase a Morok inside and shoot him)

**[Outside the Museum]**

TOR: Dako, Dako, it's Tor.  
DAKO: (waking.) Tor. The barracks, did you?  
TOR: Destroyed. The Moroks are on the run. And Vicki. Do you know what
happened?  
DAKO: She found her friends, then the Moroks came.  
TOR: They took them?  
DAKO: Yes.  
TOR: Well, where to, Dako? Where did they take them?  
DAKO: I'm not sure. The Governor's office, I think.  
TOR: Stay with him. The rest of you, come with me.

**[Governor's office]**

LOBOS: Yes. Armoury?  
GUARD [OC]: Yes, sir?  
LOBOS: What's happening?  
GUARD [OC]: We've been attacked. The weapons have gone.  
LOBOS: What? Stay there. I'll send extra men.  
GUARD [OC]: No, the barracks have been wiped out. The Xerons have got Argh!  
LOBOS: Hello? Hello? This is Governor Lobos. We'll still get away. I've got a
ship standing by at the launching port.  
COMMANDER: What about the aliens?  
LOBOS: All this trouble started when they arrived. Kill them. (As Lobos and
the Commander start to enter the Preparation room, the Xerons arrive)  
TOR: Lobos!  
(Lobos and the Commander are shot)  
VICKI: Tor!  
TOR: Vicki!  
VICKI: Oh, marvellous! Oh, thank you!  
DOCTOR: The future doesn't look too bad after all, does it?

**[Outside the Museum]**

(Exhibits are being removed from the Museum. Tor is directing them like a wife
moving into a new home.)  
TOR: Take that straight through.  
VICKI: Where's that going? Where's that going?  
TOR: Well, that's just going over there.  
VICKI: Oh.  
TOR: All this stuff.  
BARBARA: Well, it didn't take them long to dismantle the Museum, did it?  
IAN: No. Well, it must be quite a feeling, getting your own planet back.  
(The Doctor comes out of the Tardis with a tiny gizmo)  
DOCTOR: Well, there you both are. That's it. That's the little thing that's
been giving us all this dimensional trouble.  
IAN: Just that?  
DOCTOR: You know, it's a funny thing how it happened. It got stuck. I don't
know whether you've gone into a room and switched on the light and had to wait
for a second or two before the thing lit itself up.  
BARBARA: Yes, I have. I think most people have.  
DOCTOR: Well, this is the same kind of problem, you see. We landed on a
separate time track, wandered around a bit, and until this little thing
clicked itself into place, we hadn't actually arrived.  
IAN: Ah. Well, thanks very much for explaining it.  
DOCTOR: Not at all, my dear boy, anytime, anytime.  
IAN: Yes, well, do you want it back?  
DOCTOR: Yes, please, yes. I wonder if you'd mind taking it in for me. Inside
the ship. Thank you. I just want to fetch Vicki.  
BARBARA: Yes.  
(Ian and Barbara go into the Tardis)  
DOCTOR: There, now.  
VICKI: But, Tor, surely it doesn't all have to be destroyed. Can't you use any
of it?  
TOR: Oh, we only want on Xeros what belongs to Xeros, Vicki. The rest will be
broken up.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I think I can quite understand your sentiments, young man. But
you know, you mustn't lose sight of science altogether. You might need it.  
TOR: Oh, yes, Doctor.  
IAN: Doctor, what is that extraordinary thing you've got in the Tardis?  
DOCTOR: Ah, that my boy, yes. Well that I got from the Space Museum. This
young man here, Tor, very kindly gave it to me as a souvenir.  
IAN: A souvenir? Ha! Couldn't you get something a little smaller?  
DOCTOR: My dear Chesterton, I don't think I have to ask your permission for
what I take in my ship, and another thing, I will not have  
BARBARA: Oh no, Doctor, of course you don't. But, er, what is it? It looks
terribly interesting.  
DOCTOR: Yes, well, as a matter of fact, my dear, it's what they call a Time
and Space Visualiser. You know, I couldn't believe my eyes when I saw it in
the Space Museum. And I have an idea I can get it working again.  
IAN: Yes, Doctor, but what exactly does it do?  
DOCTOR: You will see, you will see. All in good time. Now then, have you said
your goodbyes?  
TOR: Yes. Thank you, Doctor. Your party made our revolution a success.  
DOCTOR: Splendid, splendid. Well now, I think we must get moving. Goodbye,
young man.  
TOR: Goodbye, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Goodbye, Tor. Come along, my child. Come along.  
TOR: Goodbye, Vicki.  
VICKI: Goodbye, Tor.  
(She gives him a last affectionate look and a wave before going into the
Tardis. Then it dematerialises.)

**[Control room]**

(On a battered, cratered planet, single-minded oversized pepperpots are
monitoring the continuum)  
DALEK: Our greatest enemies have left the planet Xeros. They are once again in
time and space.  
DALEK 2 [OC]: They cannot escape! Our time machine will soon follow them. They
will be exterminated! Exterminated! Exterminated!

_Next Episode - The Executioners_  
  
---  
  
<Back to the episode listing

Doctor Who and related marks are trademarks of BBC . Copyright © 1963,
Present. The web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment
purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

