**The Savages**  

Original Airdate: 28 May, 1966  

_Transcribers note - this episode only exists in audio format. The narration
obscures the dialogue in some places.)_

__**Episode One**__

**[Tardis]**

(The time machine has landed once more, and the scanner shows the image of a
rocky ravine.)  
DOCTOR: Yes, I think I can say that I know just exactly where we are.  
DODO: Past, present or future?  
DOCTOR: In the future. Very much in the future. We've now reached the distant
horizon of an age, an age of peace and prosperity. Now, I'm going to be off.  
(They all move away from the scanner just as a primitive looking figure
wearing animal skins and carrying a club comes into view.)

**[outside the Tardis]**

(Leaving Steven and Dodo to wait by the Tardis, the Doctor sets off along a
narrow path through the scrub. He stops occasionally to take readings, using a
hand-held device that looks like an old-fashioned ship's compass. He chuckles
to himself.)  
STEVEN: He said five minutes.  
DODO: The Doctor has no idea of time. For someone who's travelled about in
time as much as he has, that's rather funny.  
STEVEN: This is nothing to laugh at, Dodo.  
DODO: Oh, don't take it so seriously. If you're so worried about him, you
shouldn't have let him go.  
STEVEN: All right. You try telling the Doctor what to do.  
DODO: Then you should have gone with him.  
STEVEN: You heard what he said.  
DODO: You don't have to do everything he tells you. You're a grown man. Or are
you?

**[Scrubland]**

(Along the ravine, the Doctor is absorbed in his studies, unaware that he's
being watched from the nearby bushes. To his delight, the readings appear to
confirm his initial conclusions.)  
DOCTOR: Yes, it's just as I thought. Yes. Yes, well I think my young friends
are in for quite a surprise.  
(The Doctor moves on. Concealed in the bushes, two men dressed in animal skins
watch him leave, then move to follow. Steven has left the Tardis landing
site.)  
STEVEN [OC]: Doctor! Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Oh, dear me, what was that now? Well, I shan't be long anyway.  
(Annoyed at the disturbance, the Doctor continues with his scans, oblivious to
the potential threat of the watching men.  
STEVEN [OC]: Doctor?  
(Sensing movement, the Doctor turns and peers into the bushes.)  
STEVEN [OC]: Doctor? Doctor!

**[Outside the Tardis]**

(Dodo stands on a boulder and looks anxiously after Steven. She's unable to
see him over the bushes but hears his voice clearly as he calls back to her.)  
STEVEN [OC]: He doesn't answer yet, Dodo. I think I'd better go and look for
him.  
DODO: All right.  
STEVEN [OC]: I won't go far.  
(Dodo sits down on the boulder to wait. From somewhere above her comes the
sound of pebbles trickling down into the ravine. Alarmed, she turns and peers
around nervously, hoping that her imagination is playing tricks on her. After
a moment, a primitive looking man appears on the ridge above, crouched and
apparently ready to attack. Dodo screams. Steven comes running.)  
STEVEN: Dodo! What's happened?  
DODO: Up there.  
STEVEN: There's nothing there.  
DODO: I saw a man in animal skins and with an axe.  
STEVEN: You sure? Well, the Doctor said  
DODO: I don't care what he said. I saw him. He was like a savage from the
Stone Age.  
STEVEN: Then the Doctor was wrong. We're not in the future at all. We must be
back at the beginning of man.

**[Scrubland]**

(Having collected enough data, the Doctor starts back towards the Tardis.)  
DOCTOR: That ridiculous young man. He thought I'd made a mistake.  
(Behind the screen of bushes, the two primitives are fearful as the Doctor
approaches their hiding place.)  
TOR: He is coming. What's he carrying?  
CHAL: It is not a light gun.  
TOR: He is one of the leaders?  
CHAL: He is not one of our people.  
TOR: He is coming near. We must run.  
CHAL: Stay. We kill this man.  
DOCTOR: Hello, there. I say, come out from underneath there. Now don't be
alarmed. Come along now.  
TOR: Look.  
(Behind the Doctor, the savages can see two soldiers approaching along the
path.  
DOCTOR: Can you hear me? Oh, I say, do come out from underneath there, will
you?  
(The Doctor spins round.)  
DOCTOR: Oh, good gracious me. You know, I thought for one moment you were
hiding behind those bushes.  
EDAL: We have come to welcome you.  
EXORSE: It is a great honour to have you visit our planet.  
(Captain Edal and his young companion are clad in synthetic military uniforms
and elaborate helmets. Each carries an energy weapon with a wide, flared
muzzle.)  
DOCTOR: Oh, yes, I see. Well, I am expected. Do you know who I am?  
EDAL: Not your name, of course, but our space observers have their own name
for you.  
DOCTOR: Oh, and what might that be?  
EXORSE: You are known to us as the Traveller from Beyond Time.  
DOCTOR: I see. And how would you expect me here and now?  
EXORSE: The Elders of our city have been plotting the course of your space-
time ship for many light years. They estimated your arrival some time ago.  
DOCTOR: I see. Yes, well, that's very clever of them.  
EDAL: What is this? We understood from our Elders that you did not carry
weapons.  
DOCTOR: Oh yes, they're quite right, yes, I never do. No, this is my RV, you
see. This is my Reacting Vibrator. I'm able to do my calculations from this.
As I told my young friends  
EDAL: You are not alone?  
DOCTOR: Good gracious, no. Did you expect me to be?  
EDAL: We have no information about your companions.  
DOCTOR: Oh, they're very pleasant. Yes, they're both very pleasant apart from
their juvenile exuberances. I'm sure you'll like them. They must be at the
back here somewhere. I think they're rather worried because I'm a bit late
joining them.  
EDAL: We had no instructions about them. The Elders must be informed. You must
come with us.  
DOCTOR: Must?  
EXORSE: Captain Edal wishes to take you to the Elders of our City. They are
waiting to welcome you.  
DOCTOR: Oh yes, of course, yes, yes, yes, I shall come with you. In the
meantime, young man, I wonder if you'd mind trying to find my young people for
me. Steven and Dodo. Tell them the Doctor sent you.  
EDAL: Go for them, Exorse. Bring them to the city. This way.

**[Outside the Tardis]**

STEVEN: I'll have to go and look for him, Dodo. Something must have happened
to him.  
DODO: I'll come with you.  
(Dodo looks up once more.)  
DODO: Steven!  
STEVEN: What is it?  
DODO: There is something up there.  
STEVEN: Look, you're imagining things. Come on.  
(Dodo screams as something falls heavily to the ground at their feet.)  
DODO: Told you.  
(Steven pulls the object from the soil.)  
STEVEN: A spear. It's sharp as a knife. You were right, Dodo. There is someone
up there.  
DODO: What are we do now?  
STEVEN: Back to the Tardis, quick.  
(Steven and Dodo turn and run back up the path. On the ridge above them,
several primitives emerge from hiding, chasing them along the ravine throwing
crude spears.)  
DODO: They're getting nearer!  
(Suddenly one of the savages is hit. Steven and Dodo take cover behind the
Tardis as an unexpected silence falls. Dodo peers round the Tardis and
screams.)  
EXORSE: Welcome to the Traveller's companions. You are Dodo and Steven?  
STEVEN: How do you know? Who are you?  
EXORSE: The Traveller told me I would find you here.  
STEVEN: The Traveller? You mean the Doctor? Is he all right?  
EXORSE: Perfectly. He has gone to meet the Elders of our City.  
DODO: But the savages?  
EXORSE: I think you will find that some of us are fairly civilised.  
DODO: Then this isn't the Iron Age?  
EXORSE: By no means.  
STEVEN: The Doctor was right.  
EXORSE: Please, come with me to the City. Our Elders wait to honour your
Doctor. They will be very happy also to welcome his friends.

**[Council Chamber]**

(The Doctor is escorted to a vast walled city with sweeping arches and elegant
columns constructed of pale stone. A place of light and learning bearing all
the hallmarks of a highly advanced society. An elegant bearded man greets the
Doctor with a warm smile.)  
JANO: You are welcome, welcome indeed. Though we know you only as a record in
our charts of space and time, yet you seem to us like an old friend.  
DOCTOR: Well, that's very kind of you to make me feel so welcome.  
JANO: We are honoured by your visit. The whole city looks upon you with
admiration. Let me introduce myself. I am Jano, leader of the council of
Elders. These are my councillors. We have all known about you for a long time.
Look, we have charted your voyages from galaxy to galaxy and from age to age,
but we never thought that we would meet you face to face. This is a great
moment in our history. To mark our admiration, we would be pleased if you
would accept the office of one of our high Elders.  
DOCTOR: Well, my dear sir, that's very good of you. Yes, yes, very good of you
indeed. Yes, I don't remember being so highly honoured before like this
anywhere I've been.  
(Two female attendants step forward to dress the Doctor in the elaborate robes
of a High Elder.)  
JANO: We recognise in you the greatest specialist in time-space exploration.
You have taken this branch of learning far beyond our elementary calculations.  
DOCTOR: Oh, come, come, my dear sir. I know that you've been very responsible
for vast scientific research. And at the same time, I always knew a race
existed of great intelligence in this segment of the universe.  
JANO: Thank you, Doctor. We like to think that we have created here something
of lasting value.  
DOCTOR: You have, you have. Indeed, you have. And if I may so say, thank you
dear ladies for making me appear so grand.  
(The Doctor is admiring his new clothes as Exorse arrives.)  
EXORSE: The Doctor's two friends, sir. Steven and Dodo.  
JANO: You are very welcome.  
DOCTOR: Ah, there you are, both of you. Well, I don't think I was so far
wrong, my boy. What do I look like, my dear?  
DODO: You're really with it now, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Yes. With what, my dear?  
STEVEN: What is this place?  
JANO: Did the Doctor not tell you?  
DODO: Not exactly.  
STEVEN: He said it was an age of peace and prosperity.  
DOCTOR: Yes, and I was right. They are very highly developed civilised minds.  
JANO: But our calculations were incomplete. We did not realise that the Doctor
would have anyone with him. Nevertheless, although our honours are for him,
our gifts are for you.  
(Steven is presented with an ornate dagger and Dodo is given mirror inlaid
with precious gemstones. )  
DODO: Oh, thank you. It's beautiful.  
STEVEN: Look at that, Doctor.  
DODO: Steven, these are real diamonds.  
JANO: Perhaps Steven and Dodo would like to make themselves at home.  
DOCTOR: Oh yes, thank you.  
JANO: Our young people will show them round.  
DOCTOR: An excellent idea, sir. Well, my boy, now perhaps you'll believe me
next time I tell you I know precisely where I am.  
(Steven and Dodo are lead away as the Doctor turns back to Jano.)  
JANO: Now, Doctor, we have many questions to ask you.

**[Outside the City]**

EDAL: We're only the city guard, of course. They don't ask our opinion, do
they?  
EXORSE: What's the matter, Captain?  
EDAL: I don't trust them. I never did trust strangers. Why should we treat
this old Doctor as one of ourselves?  
EXORSE: The Elders think highly of him.  
EDAL: The Elders. All right, we've wasted enough time this morning. Get back
on patrol. Take the Crater section.  
(Edal and Exorse split up. At a distance the savages, now accompanied by a
girl, watch them go.)  
CHAL: They have begun hunting.  
TOR: We must warn our people.  
CHAL: Nanina, go back to the caves. Tell the families to hide.  
NANINA: But what of you, Chal?  
CHAL: We will be safe, we will warn the others. Nanina, take care in the
craters.  
(Nanina slips away. Out in the craters, Exorse is quartering the ground in a
standard search pattern. He's poised and alert, with his gun raised, one
finger curled in readiness on the trigger.)

**[City Avenue]**

(Steven and Dodo are being guided by a young man, Avon, (no, not Paul Darrow)
and a girl called Flower.)  
FLOWER: We have built into the city a life-giving sun of our own. Isn't that
right, Avon?  
AVON: It is man's intellect which decides the heat and cold in our city.  
FLOWER: Yes. After all, the Elders do know what's best for us, although it
would be rather nice to know what real things are like sometimes.  
AVON: Real what?  
FLOWER: You know. Real wind, real rain, real sunshine.  
AVON: Don't be ridiculous. They have given us all this.  
DODO: It's beautiful.  
AVON: Our artists have every opportunity to develop their talents. Here,
everyone has a chance to do what is best for him to do.  
STEVEN: It's certainly a wonderful job. But how have you managed it? What's
the secret?  
FLOWER: Secret? What makes you think we have a secret?  
STEVEN: Other civilisations have failed to make this advance.  
FLOWER: Well, that doesn't mean  
AVON: Be quiet, Flower. Our scientists have made one simple discovery, and due
to this they have found the way to give us all greater energy, greater
intellect and greater talents.  
STEVEN: One simple discovery?  
DODO: What was it?  
AVON: This is something best discussed by the Elders and your Doctor.

**[Council Chamber]**

DOCTOR: Well, gentlemen, I can't just sit here in all these grand clothes
without asking a few questions. After all, there's my reputation to think
about.  
JANO: What do you mean, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Well, if I accept your gifts, I must endorse your life. But I can't do
that without knowing something about you.  
JANO: But surely you know a great deal about us.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I know very well that you are far advanced than most planets. But
how you achieve this, I know not. And let's face it gentlemen, you are much
advanced. Now, I would like to know how.

**[Outside The City]**

(Nanina is used to hiding from the guards with their light guns, but that
doesn't make her any less afraid, and she makes slow progress, scrambling
tentatively from one hiding place to another. Poised close to the mouth of the
ravine, she hears a movement and spots Exorse patrolling the ridge above.
Taking cover, Nanina waits for him to move away. Chal and Tor look down into
the ravine, Tor straining to catch sight of Nanina.)  
TOR: I cannot see her. She must have got away.  
CHAL: She has not crossed the ravine yet. She is still hiding.  
TOR: Can you see the hunter?  
CHAL: He is going into the ravine.  
(Exorse makes his way along the floor of the ravine and disappears from sight.
Still concealed in the craters, Nanina is all too aware that she must move on,
and quickly, but there's scant cover between her current position and the
mouth of the ravine. Steeling her nerves, Nanina forces herself to scramble
forward with more haste than caution, her fear making her careless. She
slithers down into the basin of the ravine in a shower of stones, alerting
Exorse to her position.)  
CHAL: He is over there. And Nanina?  
TOR: She is there too.  
CHAL: Nanina!  
(Panicking, Nanina starts running along the ravine like a frightened rabbit.
Desperately scanning the rocks around her, she misses her footing and goes
sprawling on the ground. Frantically she claws her way forward then scrambles
to her feet again, running on in blind panic. As Chal and Tor watch, Exorse
appears on the ridge above Nanina. He takes aim with his light gun.)  
CHAL: Nanina! Not that way!  
(Exorse fires his weapon. Nanina is engulfed in intense light, trapped like a
fly in amber. By moving the light gun, Exorse can control Nanina's movements
like a puppet. He directs her out of the craters and back towards the city.)  
TOR: He has taken her.

**[Council Chamber]**

JANO: Life preys on other forms of life, as you know, Doctor. Wild beasts live
on other animals. Mankind must have food, water, and oxygen.  
DOCTOR: Oh, yes, it's quite obvious to the meanest intellect that, well, how
can I say, that you've found a much more effective source of energy.  
JANO: That is true, Doctor. We have learned how to transfer the energy of life
directly to ourselves. We can tap it at its source. It is as though we were
able to recharge ourselves with life's vital force.

**[Outside the City]**

(Exorse and Nanina have left the ravine and pass close by where Tor and Chal
are hiding. Nanina is powerless under the influence of the light gun, and does
not react as Chal calls out.)  
CHAL: Nanina. Leave her. Leave the girl. Take me in her place!  
(But Exorse ignores the old man, and he and his captive continue on their
way.)

**[Council Chamber]**

(Jano proudly shows the Doctor a complex model of the technology that forms
the heart of their society.)  
JANO: The energy of life which we accumulate we store in vats such as these.
Then, when the Elders decide that some member of the community needs new
force, we can transfer that energy directly.  
DOCTOR: To a member of your community.  
JANO: Exactly. We can give ourselves new power.  
DOCTOR: Yes. Of course, you need a very high form of life to make this source
effective.  
JANO: That is true, Doctor. We absorb only a very special form of animal
vitality.

**[City Avenue]**

(Emerging from the scrubland, Exorse and Nanina approach the city wall. Before
them, a tall diamond shaped portal starts to slide to one side as Exorse
activates the opening mechanism. Not too far away, Flower is proving to be an
enthusiastic guide.)  
FLOWER: Don't think we're always serious. We play games, we dance, we go
hunting. Our life's very happy. We do everything we want, go everywhere we
want.  
AVON: Do not go that way.  
DODO: I thought you said we could go anywhere.  
AVON: Well, it leads to the world beyond the City.  
DODO: Don't you ever go outside?  
FLOWER: We're not allowed to.  
AVON: There is no need.  
FLOWER: Yes, that's right. Everything we want, we have here in the City.  
STEVEN: What about the men we met outside?  
FLOWER: They're the guards.  
DODO: What, to keep back the savages?  
AVON: The savages?  
DODO: The men in animal skins.  
AVON: You saw them?  
DODO: They threw spears at us.  
AVON: Yes, well, the guards are to keep these people away. That is why we
seldom go beyond the City.  
FLOWER: Let's forget such a dismal topic. Come, I'll show you the stadium.
There's going to be a celebration there tonight especially for you.  
(The tour continues but Dodo lags behind. Through a narrow window she catches
sight of Exorse and Nanina outside, as Exorse forces Nanina through the door
and into the City ahead of him.)  
AVON: Dodo!  
DODO: I'm coming. Every time I want to see something, they stop me.  
STEVEN: Dodo, you're a guest here. Try to behave like one.  
DODO: I hate conducted tours.  
STEVEN: What were you goggling at anyway?  
DODO: I saw one of the guards go past. He had a prisoner.  
STEVEN: You must be off your head! You wouldn't have a prisoner in a place
like this.  
DODO: He had one of the savages with him. A girl. She seemed to be moving
along in a light that shone from one of those guns they carry.  
STEVEN: Oh Dodo, really.  
DODO: Oh no, it's true. It was like a torch. As he moved, she went ahead.  
FLOWER: Come along, we're just wondering which way to take you now.  
DODO: Why are they so cautious about what they show us?  
STEVEN: You imagine things.  
FLOWER: What are you whispering about?  
STEVEN: We're just coming.  
DODO: We're not going to find out much about this place from these two, are
we?  
STEVEN: Come on!

**[City corridor]**

(Exorse project Nanina through a series of metal corridors deeper into the
City. As they approach a door at the end of the last corridor, the light beam
wavers and moves off Nanina. Disengaged, she reels and slumps against the
wall.)  
NANINA: Please, please let me go.  
(Exorse deactivates the light gun and presses a button to request entry.)

**[Control room]**

(The chief scientist looks up from his work.)  
SENTA: That must be Exorse. He's already behind his deadline. What's happening
to security this morning?  
(Two technicians wheel a gurney across the centre, on which a male savage is
strapped. He appears extremely weak and disorientated.)  
SENTA: He seems very depleted. What's his vitality reading? Seventeen point
four. They took that very low. Can't they follow instructions in there, or
have I got to supervise every transfer of energy myself. Now, let's see. His
recuperative charge is high. He'll recover. Those confounded guards, they're
all the same. They keep you waiting, throw the whole routine out of gear, and
then they expect you to be ready for them the moment they arrive. All right,
take him away. Release him. Help him along corridor KO4, emergency exit. Go
ahead.  
(An assistant helps the exhausted figure to his feet and leads him from the
room. Senta opens another door to allow Exorse entry. Seeing Nanina, Senta
turns to instruct one of his technicians.)  
SENTA: Prepare this one. A47. We're behind schedule. We must transfer
immediately. I am filing a complaint, Exorse. You're late. Surely she didn't
give you much trouble?  
EXORSE: Of course not. I was delayed by the strangers.  
SENTA: You've seen them?  
EXORSE: Captain Edal and I were the first to find them. We brought them back.
That was why I was late.  
SENTA: You've actually seen them. What are they like?  
EXORSE: Very like us, in some ways.  
SENTA: But in some ways, they're different?  
EXORSE: Yes, but I can't quite say what it is. I must be going.  
(Exorse leaves.)  
SENTA: Is A47 ready yet? Yes, that seems all right. Tell them to be quite sure
not to take A47 below vitality reading 24.  
(At the chime, Senta activates a control to open the door, and the assistant
who removed the savage reappears.)  
SENTA: Is he all right? Let's see.  
(Senta activates an observation screen and appears satisfied to observe the
man moving slowly away.

**[City]**

(Steven stares from a window onto a beautiful communal square with a fountain.
He's impressed by what he's seen but still has questions.)  
STEVEN: This city really is fantastic. You've fountains, music, everything.  
AVON: Yes, we're very proud of it.  
STEVEN: Why is it only within the confines of the City itself that you have
such ideal conditions? What about beyond?  
FLOWER: Well  
AVON: We've told you before. We have everything here that we need.  
(Distracted, Dodo has spotted Exorse emerging from a concealed doorway.)

[Control room]

(Nanina is now strapped to a trolley.)  
NANINA: Please, please.  
SENTA: All right. Take her away.  
NANINA: Oh no! No! No please!  
(Nanina is wheeled away out of the control room and into the laboratory
beyond.)

**[City]**

(Curiosity aroused, Dodo slips away from the others and crosses to the doorway
from which Exorse appeared. She quickly works out how to open the door and
ventures inside. The door closes behind her. She finds herself in a darkened
corridor and hesitates slightly as her eyes grow accustomed to the gloom.)

**[Council Chamber]**

JANO: Doctor, do you realise that with our knowledge, we can make the brave
man braver, the wise man wiser, the strong man stronger. We can make the
beautiful girl more beautiful still. You will see the advantages of that in
the perfection of our race.

**[City]**

FLOWER: Come and see this, Dodo.  
STEVEN: Yes, come on, Dodo, I'm sure you'll find. Oh, no. Now where's she
gone? What's happened?  
FLOWER: Dodo?  
STEVEN: Dodo? Dodo, where are you?

**[Corridor]**

(Ahead of her, Dodo can make out a glimmer of light and she moves cautiously
towards it. She creeps along, heading slowly for a T junction in the corridors
from where the light shines dimly. Slowly she becomes aware of ragged
breathing and shuffling footsteps coming closer. The strange acoustics in the
corridors mean she cannot pinpoint the direction of the noises. She edges
ahead nervously, eventually reaching the junction. Summoning all her courage,
she steps into the next corridor. Dodo finds herself confronted by a male
savage dressed in animal skins. His eyes are wide, staring blindly ahead as he
stumbles forward. Frozen in terror, Dodo is unable to move as he lurches
towards her, his arms outstretched. She screams.

__**Episode Two**__

**[Corridor]**

(The savage lurches towards Dodo, but it is quickly clear she has nothing to
fear. He's utterly drained and appears unaware of her presence. He drags
himself past her and towards the door at the far end of the corridor. The door
slides open, light flooding in. The exhausted man collapses, and Dodo goes to
help him. He tries to speak but cannot. As Dodo helps him outside he stumbles,
and Dodo is startled as two more savages emerge from the bushes to help him
up. Chal sees Dodo and raises his spear to attack. The fallen man manages to
stop him as Dodo retreats into the corridor and the door slides closed once
more. Faint sounds of machinery and bubbling noises draw Dodo's attention. She
moves back along the corridor to investigate.)

**[Senta's laboratory]**

(Nanina is still strapped to the trolley and inside a glass case.)  
NANINA: Please, no, don't, please, don't, no, no  
(Several technicians bustle around, making preparations as she cries.)  
SENTA: Make the connection.  
(A large inverted funnel device is lowered into place over Nanina's body. Dodo
moves cautiously down the corridor, disturbed by the faint sounds ahead. She
stops and listens, then frowns and moves on again. Along one side of the
laboratory, huge glass-windowed bottles filled with inert black liquid sit
waiting.)  
SENTA: Vapourisation?  
TECH 1: Vapourisation on.  
TECH 2: Vapourisation on.  
TECH 3: Vapourisation on.  
(As the technicians switch on the banks of machinery, a white mist swirls
around Nanina.)  
SENTA: Prepare for transfer.  
TECH 1: Standing by.  
(Senta turns a wheel on the control panel and the vats begin to bubble. Dodo
is closer now, and strains to listen to the sounds coming from within the
laboratory.)  
TECH 1: Twenty three point zero  
TECH 2: Thirty eight  
TECH 1: Twenty four point zero nine  
TECH 2: One hundred.  
(The black liquid within the vats is now bubbling furiously and beginning to
clear slightly. Nanina lies still, resigned to her fate.)  
TECH 2: One point zero two.

**[City]**

STEVEN: Dodo! Dodo, where are you? What could have happened to her?  
AVON: I cannot think. Perhaps she's playing a joke.  
STEVEN: What do you mean?  
FLOWER: She may be hiding. Just a game.  
STEVEN: Not even Dodo'd be as stupid as that. Something must have happened to
her. Dodo! Dodo!

**[Senta's laboratory]**

(Dodo reaches the end of the corridor and stops. TECH 1: Three point five
zero.  
TECH 2: Thirty one  
(Dodo enters, amazed.)

**[Council Chamber]**

JANO: So you see Doctor, with this new stimulus, intellectual workers find
themselves able to accomplish more. Artists are able to create works of
brilliance and beauty. Everything citizen  
STEVEN [OC]: Doctor! Doctor!  
(Steven comes rushing in.)  
DOCTOR: My dear Steven, you must not come bursting into the room like this.
Well?  
STEVEN: Well it's Dodo. She's gone.  
DOCTOR: Gone? What do you mean, gone?  
STEVEN: She's completely vanished.  
JANO: What are we to understand by this, Avon?  
AVON: It's true.  
FLOWER: Dodo was with us, and she vanished into thin air.  
DOCTOR: Well, I really don't know what all this fuss is about. I'm sure the
child won't come to any harm while she here.  
JANO: No. She cannot leave the city.  
DOCTOR: If I know that young lady, she's well enough to look after herself.
Now, come along, please let's finish the conversation.  
STEVEN: But Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Tut, tut, tut.

**[Senta's laboratory]**

(Dodo still hasn't been noticed in the doorway.)  
SENTA: Subject is very weak. Prepare to switch. I'll give you the signal.  
(The liquid in the vats is nearly clear now, yet the previously agitated
bubbling has reduced to a gentle effervescence.  
SENTA: Slowly, slowly.  
(Dodo has been spotted.)  
SENTA: Vitality reading?  
TECH 1: Twenty six.  
SENTA: Carefully now.  
(Technician 2 makes a grab for Dodo.)  
TECH 2: In the control room with her. Quick.

**[Control room]**

DODO: What do you think you're doing. Leave me alone!  
TECH 3: Who is she?  
TECH 2: She must be from outside. I'll check the list.  
TECH 3: Why is she wearing such strange clothes?  
DODO: You keep your hands to yourself.  
TECH 2: We have no record of her. The only female in here is the one who is in
there now.  
TECH 3: She must be from outside. Is she for transference?  
TECH 2: She must be. What else? We'd better make preparations.  
(The two technicians advance on Dodo.)  
DODO: No, no, no!

**[City]**

AVON: We came along here, you see, then we stopped and looked out of this
window.  
FLOWER: The window?  
EDAL: It's too small. She couldn't get out of that. You should have watched
her. You'll be held responsible.  
FLOWER: We thought she was following. We didn't know she could vanish.  
EDAL: She passed here?  
AVON: Yes, but she couldn't go through it.  
EDAL: Why not?  
(Edal opens the concealed door.)  
STEVEN: Hey, what is this?  
FLOWER: Oh, it's nothing. We never use it. Pay no attention.  
EDAL: The guards use it.  
FLOWER: Oh, we never go there. None of the young people do. Dodo would never
go down there.  
STEVEN: You don't know her. She'd go anywhere.  
EDAL: If she's gone down there, I wouldn't give much for her chances.  
STEVEN: What do you mean?  
EDAL: I wouldn't give much for yours either.  
FLOWER: She wouldn't go that way. It's not allowed.  
STEVEN: Well, if it isn't allowed, Dodo would be the first in the queue. I'm
going to take a look.  
EDAL: Stay where you are!  
(Edal draws his gun, barring the way.)

**[Laboratory]**

(Attempts to restrain Dodo have failed, so one of the technicians has gone to
fetch Senta.)  
TECH 2: Something very strange has happened, Senta. We have one of the
outsiders, but she does not submit. She is fighting.  
SENTA: What?  
TECH 2: In the control room.  
SENTA: Take over.

**[Control room]**

(Dodo is evading the other technician.)  
DODO: I don't know what you do in here, but whatever it is, I don't like it!
Oh, no you don't! I don't know who on Earth you think I am, but you'd better
keep back. This equipment must cost a packet. Keep back, or I'll smash the
lot!  
SENTA: Don't move! She could kill everyone.

**[City]**

EDAL: You're not allowed in there.  
STEVEN: It's the only place she can be.  
EDAL: I will go and see.  
(Edal goes down the passage.)  

**[Laboratory]**

(The transference vats are bubbling furiously again.)  
TECH 1: Senta! Senta!

**[Control room]**

SENTA: Who are you?  
DODO: I'm with the Doctor. We are guests here. If this is how you treat your
guests.  
SENTA: You are one of the people from beyond time?  
TECH 2: How is it possible?  
DODO: Yes, I am.  
SENTA: But why are you here? TECH 1 [OC]: Senta!  
SENTA: Stay here.  
TECH 1: It is almost too late.

**[Laboratory]**

(Dodo follows them and watches as Senta adjusts some controls.)  
SENTA: Break the connection!  
(Edal arrives and goes to Dodo.)  
EDAL: What are you doing here?  
DODO: I just came through that door up there.  
SENTA: I shall report the whole matter. Who is in charge of the party?  
EDAL: What has she seen?  
SENTA: It's hard to say.  
EDAL: The Elders have already been told.  
SENTA: Well, get her out of here!  
EDAL: I already have my orders. Come along, this way.  
DODO: All these instruments, that big glass thing, and those huge bottles.
What do they do here?  
EDAL: Come along. Your friends are waiting for you.  
(Edal and Dodo leave. Senta gestures towards Nanina.)  
SENTA: Get her out.  
(The technicians obey. She is unconscious.)  
TECH 1: Is it too late?  
SENTA: Not quite. We've been lucky. Make a record of this for her files. It
must be some considerable time before we extract any more life energy from
this particular subject.

**[City]**

(Edal returns with Dodo.)  
STEVEN: Where the dickens did you get to?  
DODO: Oh, don't you start now.  
STEVEN: Why? What happened?  
DODO: You have no idea. I was attacked by some sort of mad doctor.  
FLOWER: Oh, Dodo. What a ridiculous story.  
DODO: What goes on down there anyway? Is it a sort of hospital?  
AVON: Yes, yes that's right. It's a hospital.  
FLOWER: Perhaps they thought you were a patient.  
DODO: I wouldn't like to be a patient in their hands.  
EDAL: You must have a reason for saying that. I would like to know what it is.
What did you see?  
DODO: It wasn't anything I saw exactly, just a feeling about the place. It was
all so sterile and inhuman.  
STEVEN: Er, she imagines things.  
FLOWER: I can see that. I know just the place to cheer you up, Dodo.  
EDAL: You will have to report to the Elders. I will take you there. You two
will undoubtedly be called to answer for your negligence.  
DODO: Oh, I hope I haven't landed you in any trouble.  
FLOWER: Oh, no, we'll be all right.  
AVON: Of course we will be. Perhaps we'll see you both later.  
STEVEN: Yes. I hope so.  
EDAL: Stay here. A guard will collect you.  
AVON: Must Flower be taken before the Elders? It was my fault. I should have
kept a better watch on Dodo.  
EDAL: You should be thinking of your own defence.  
FLOWER: Oh, Avon, what will happen to us? Will they take?  
AVON: Do not worry, Flower. That is only for the savages.  
FLOWER: Are you sure?  
AVON: I'm sure you will be all right.  
FLOWER: But the guard's coming for us.  
AVON: Do not be afraid. After all, this is a free state, isn't it, and we are
all equal here.  
FLOWER: But  
AVON: They cannot harm us.  
STEVEN: You all right?  
DODO: I am now.  
STEVEN: I told you not to go off by yourself.  
DODO: Don't worry, it won't happen again.  
(Steven and Dodo leave, then a guard comes for Avon and Flower. He uses his
light gun on them to lead them away.)

**[Laboratory]**

(Nanina is awake and untied, but very dazed.)  
SENTA: You are to go. You understand? You are to go. Help her to release exit
number four.

**[Council Chamber]**

DOCTOR: A very interesting discussion, gentlemen. Yes, I must say.  
(Edal, Dodo and Steven enter.)  
DOCTOR: Oh, so there you are, my dear. You know you had that young man in
quite a state.  
DODO: Doctor, I must speak to you. I want to tell you what happened.  
DOCTOR: Not for the moment, my dear.  
STEVEN: I think you ought to listen.  
DOCTOR: Do you my boy? Well, I'm afraid I can't just now. I've had a very
interesting discussion with these gentlemen. You know, I have some documents
which I think that you might be interested to see. They're records of my
investigations into time travel. You might find them rather surprising.  
JANO: You intend to return to the Tardis, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Yes, just for the moment. But I won't be long.  
STEVEN: I'll come with you.  
DOCTOR: Oh, splendid, my boy. Thank you. I need someone to help me carry a few
things.  
JANO: I'll send one of my guards with you.  
DOCTOR: No, no, thank you, that won't be necessary. Thank you, indeed. Well,
come along, my dear. We don't want to lose you again, do we? (The Doctor,
Steven and Dodo leave.)  
JANO: How serious is it?  
EDAL: What she saw meant nothing to the girl.  
JANO: But does she suspect anything?  
EDAL: It's hard to say. What about the Doctor?  
JANO: He is a very sophisticated man, Captain. It is impossible to know what
he thinks.  
EDAL: It might be wise to keep an eye on him.  
JANO: It might be very wise. Follow them.

**[outside the City]**

(Our travellers set off across the scrubland back to the Tardis, with Edal
following at a discreet distance.)  
DOCTOR: Ah, now. Wait a minute, let me see, where are we?  
DODO: Doctor, why wouldn't you let me tell you what happened?  
DOCTOR: Because I didn't want those gentlemen to overhear what you were
saying, child.  
STEVEN: Who? Jano and the Elders?  
DOCTOR: Precisely.  
STEVEN: Why, don't you trust them?  
DOCTOR: Not altogether.  
STEVEN: What have you discovered?  
DOCTOR: Nothing really, but I sense that things aren't all together right
here. Now I think we go this way, isn't it? Come along.  
STEVEN: Hey, wait a minute.  
DOCTOR: What?  
STEVEN: What's that?  
(A body is lying in the bushes.)  
DODO: It's one of the savages.  
DOCTOR: Really? But he's not moving. Yes, yes, let's take a look. Hold that.
Here.  
(The man tries to get to his feet, but falls back.)  
DODO: Why, that's him, the man in the corridor. The one I helped. But there
were two others.  
DOCTOR: Was he in this condition when you met him before?  
DODO: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Did he come out of that laboratory?  
DODO: Yes, I think so. What's that matter with him, Doctor? Do you know?  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, yes, I think I do, yes. It's just as I feared.  
DODO: Feared?  
DOCTOR: Yes, their wonderful civilisation is based on this. They've discovered
a way of extracting life's force from human beings, and absorbing it into
themselves, leaving the victim, as you see, almost dead.  
DODO: What can we do to help him?  
DOCTOR: Here's the key to the Tardis, my boy. Now I want you to go to the
emergency cabinet and you will see a container with capsules marked D403.
Bring it back here as soon as you can. I think we might be able to do
something for the poor man.  
STEVEN: Right.  
DOCTOR: Meanwhile, take that, I don't want it anymore.  
(The Doctor hands his RV to Steven, who leaves with Dodo.)  
DOCTOR: Now, now, now, now you just rest there, there's a good fellow. We'll
have you as right as rain in five minutes. Now I just want you to breathe in
and out. Gently. One, two. One  
EDAL: Do you require assistance, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: What do you know of this?  
EDAL: He's one of the savages. I shouldn't let him worry you. He's probably
shamming. He should be back on the reserve. Come on, you lazy animal, get up,
move! Get back to your sector.  
DOCTOR: What are you doing, fellow? Leave the man alone. He'll probably die.  
EDAL: I don't think there's much chance of that, Doctor. Come on, you, move.  
DOCTOR: I insist that you leave him alone!  
EDAL: I don't think you understand, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: I think I understand only too well.  
EDAL: You do? And you still waste time on this creature?  
DOCTOR: This human being!  
EDAL: Why the concern, Doctor? They are only savages.  
DOCTOR: They are men. Human beings, like you and me. Although it appears at
the moment that you're behaving in a rather sub-human fashion.  
EDAL: They have not developed like we have. They are savages! Come on.  
DOCTOR: I forbid you to touch him!  
EDAL: You are obstructing me, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: I am looking after this wretched fellow.  
EDAL: You will come with me.  
DOCTOR: I have already told you I'm busy. I'm going to take care of this poor
man.  
EDAL: I have warned you! You will do as I order you!  
DOCTOR: Hmm?  
EDAL: Or you'll know the alternative. You will come with me back to the city.  
(Edal draws his light gun and the Doctor is forced to comply. On the ground,
the fallen savage raises his head weakly to watch them leave. A while later,
Steven and Dodo return with a small metal container.)  
DODO: Where were they?  
STEVEN: Over there.  
DODO: Where's the Doctor?  
STEVEN: Doctor? Doctor!  
DODO: Now what do we do?  
STEVEN: Give him the capsules.  
DODO: What about the Doctor?  
STEVEN: Oh, you know what he's like. He'll be back. He's just roamed off
somewhere.  
DODO: Here, take this.  
(With an effort, the helpless savage swallows the capsule.)  
DODO: Shall I give him another one?  
STEVEN: Yes, that first one seems to have done him good.  
(As she hands over a second pill, her eyes scan the ridge.)  
DODO: Steven, the savages! And they've got spears!  
(Up on the ridge.)  
TOR: I'll aim for the man. You kill the girl.  
CHAL: No, we must not kill them.  
TOR: They have no light guns. They cannot harm us. It will be revenge.  
CHAL: Revenge is no good! And what would the guards do to our people?  
TOR: But we must save Wylda.  
CHAL: Not by killing.  
TOR: If we wait too long he will die.  
CHAL: He will not die. They will not let him die. They take their strength
from the living. We must wait and be patient. It might be a trap. Come on.  
(Dodo watches as the savages creep closer.)  
DODO: We must get away.  
STEVEN: To the city?  
DODO: No, I don't want to go back there.  
STEVEN: All right. Where to, then?  
DODO: Well, couldn't we get to the Tardis?  
STEVEN: Might be too late. Besides, we can't go. They might have got the
Doctor.  
DODO: They're coming nearer.  
STEVEN: All right. Don't let them see you're afraid.  
DODO: I'll try.  
(Tor raises his spear to attack.)  
TOR: Kill them!  
CHAL: Wait!  
WYLDA: Do not kill.  
CHAL: Wylda speaks.  
WYLDA: Do not kill them. They're friends.  
CHAL: Friends? What did you give him?  
STEVEN: We gave him medicine.  
CHAL: Why?  
STEVEN: Because he's sick.  
CHAL: We left him to recover. He is not sick.  
STEVEN: But look at him!  
CHAL: You think he is sick?  
STEVEN: Yes!  
CHAL: You are from the city?  
DODO: No, we're not.  
CHAL: You must come from the city.  
STEVEN: No, we come from another place.  
TOR: We have seen you. You were in the city.  
STEVEN: We were taken there.  
CHAL: You have friends in the city?  
WYLDA: She helped me, and the old man spoke against it.  
STEVEN: The Doctor? Where is he?  
WYLDA: They have taken him.  
STEVEN: Taken him!  
DODO: Where to?  
WYLDA: To the city.  
DODO: They've taken him prisoner? Steven, what are we going to do?  
STEVEN: Who took him?  
WYLDA: The guard.  
STEVEN: One of the guards? Why would they want to do a thing like that?  
WYLDA: The old man was angry. He tried to protect me from their captain.

**[Council Chamber]**

JANO: We do not understand you, Doctor. You who have accepted our honours
gladly, how can you condemn this great artistic and scientific civilisation
because of a few wretched barbarians?  
DOCTOR: So your rewards are only for the people that agree with you?  
JANO: No. No, of course not. But if you are going to oppose us.  
DOCTOR: Oppose you? Indeed I am going to oppose you, just in the same way that
I oppose the Daleks or any other menace to common humanity.  
JANO: I am sorry you take this attitude, Doctor. It is most unscientific. You
are standing in the way of human progress.  
DOCTOR: Human progress, sir? How dare you call your treatment of these people
progress!  
JANO: They are hardly people, Doctor. They are not like us.  
DOCTOR: I fail to see the difference.  
JANO: Do you not realise that all progress is based on exploitation?  
DOCTOR: Exploitation indeed! This, sir, is protracted murder!  
JANO: We have achieved a very great deal merely by the sacrifice of a few
savages.  
DOCTOR: The sacrifice of even one soul is far too great! You must put an end
to this inhuman practice.  
JANO: You leave me no choice. Take him away, Captain. And tell Senta that we
have an emergency. I shall be sending him special instructions.

**[outside the City]**

STEVEN: We must do something to help.  
CHAL: There is nothing we can do.  
STEVEN: Look, the people in the city are just men. You can fight them.  
CHAL: They are too strong.  
DODO: We are not going to let them do anything to the Doctor.  
CHAL: They have the light guns.  
TOR: They will use the Doctor like the rest of us.  
DODO: What do you mean?  
CHAL: They will take him to the room where the great vats are.  
STEVEN: What will happen to him there?  
CHAL: He will become like us.  
STEVE: We'll see about that.  
CHAL: They'll do the same to you if you

**[Senta's laboratory]**

EDAL: Senta, this is the Doctor, the traveller from beyond time.  
DOCTOR: So this is the place where you carry out your foul experiments.  
SENTA: This is my laboratory. I'm honoured to meet you, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Thank you. What's this?  
SENTA: Why have you brought the Doctor down here today? I've no time for
visitors. We have a very full schedule, as you're well aware, Captain Edal.  
EDAL: You will suspend all other work and prepare for an emergency
transference.  
SENTA: But that's out of the question.  
EDAL: The order comes directly from Jano.  
SENTA: You are interested in our work?  
DOCTOR: Oh, yes, yes, interested, yes. Although I disapprove of your
activities.  
SENTA: I shall be honoured to show you my laboratory when I have the time.
Well, where is the savage for transference?  
DOCTOR: No, gentlemen, no, gentlemen. I don't wish to bear witness.  
EDAL: It's quite all right, Doctor. You will not be asked to witness this
experiment.  
DOCTOR: I should hope not, my boy.  
EDAL: Instead you will have the pleasure of participating in it.  
(Behind them, Jano enters the room.)  
DOCTOR: What did you say?  
SENTA: Do you realise what you're saying? We cannot transfer such a high form
of life. It's never been done.  
JANO: This time it will be done. It will be an interesting experiment for you.  
SENTA: But, he's a fellow scientist, he's one of us.  
JANO: You have your orders. See that they are carried out.  
DOCTOR: I think you have forgotten one thing, gentlemen.  
JANO: I don't think so, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: My feelings in this matter! I will not submit to your nauseating
experiments! I am going out of that door, so don't try to stop me.  
EDAL: Go back, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Let me pass.  
(Edal turns his light gun on the Doctor.)  
SENTA: You two, strap him to the trolley!  
(Caught in the light beam, and powerless to resist, the Doctor is lifted onto
a gurney and strapped down.)  
JANO: Report to me as soon as the transference is completed.  
(Jano leaves.)  
SENTA: Take the readings. Open a special file in the computers. We've never
done a transference like this before. We'll use channel double A, double one.  
TECH 1: We are ready, Senta.  
SENTA: Very well. Stand by.  
(The Doctor is wheeled into the cubicle.)  
SENTA: All correct. Make the connection.  
(The transparent panels close around the Doctor, shutting him in. The funnel-
like device lowers itself gently from the ceiling coming to rest just above
his chest.)  
SENTA: High input vats?  
TECH 1: High input vats in contact.  
SENTA: Vapourisation.  
TECH 2: Vapourisation on.  
TECH 1: Vapourisation on.  
(The glass cubicle fills with the white gas.)  
SENTA: Prepare for transfer.  
TECH 1: Standing by.  
SENTA: Now remember. We've never done anything like this before. Watch
everything very carefully. Let me know the moment there's anything unusual.  
TECH 1: I will, Senta.  
SENTA: Transfer on.  
(In the vats, the bubbles are small and sluggish, barely making any change in
the viscous black fluid.)  
SENTA: Call me the readings.  
TECH 1: Point zero one, point zero two, point zero three, point zero six.  
SENTA: Keep it steady.  
TECH 1: Point zero eight. It's impossible. He'll never stand it!  
SENTA: It should be working by now.  
TECH 1: Point one zero.  
SENTA: Come on, come on! It must work!  
TECH 1: Point three zero.  
TECH 2: Vitality dropping fast.  
SENTA: It's no use. We must stop the experiment.  
TECH 1: No, Senta. Look, it's working!  
(There are results in the collection vats at last.)  
SENTA: Energy reaction?  
TECH 2: Seventeen. Constant  
SENTA: It is working.  
TECH 2: Seventeen rising.  
TECH 3: Point seven zero.  
TECH 2: Eighteen.  
SENTA: Take it up a couple of points.  
TECH 2: Nineteen.  
SENTA: Two more.  
TECH 2: Twenty.  
SENTA: Wonderful! It's amazing. He must have tremendous strength.  
TECH 2: Twenty one. Twenty two.  
SENTA: Vapourisation is perfect. Everything is working. It's going to be a
classic transference. This is our greatest success.  
TECH 1: One point five zero.  
(The glass collection vats bubble furiously and the thick black liquid begins
to clear. Unconscious in the cubicle, the Doctor is utterly helpless as the
life force is drawn out of him.)  
TECH 2: Twenty five.  
TECH 1: Two point five zero.

__**Episode 3**__

**[Control room]**

TECH 1: Five point one. Zero. Five point six. Zero. Six point one. Zero. Six
point seven. Zero. Seven point one. Zero.  
SENTA: Adjust resistance pressure. What's the resistance reading?  
TECH 1: Negative.  
SENTA: Vitality's dropping. Watch it carefully. Adjust cutout at twenty five.
Don't reduce any lower or he may not recover.  
(Jano enters.)  
JANO: Senta! Your message was passed on to me. You are to be congratulated.  
SENTA: It's a perfect transfer.  
JANO: Remarkable. How is the Doctor?  
SENTA: Reduced nervous tension of course, but in good condition. Given time he
will recover, and like the others, we'll be able to use him again.  
JANO: You realise what this means, Senta. If we are able to achieve this
transfer successfully, we will be able to do the same with the other time
travellers.  
SENTA: The young man and the girl.  
JANO: As it is, they are a danger to us, but as a source of energy they could
be of great value. Captain Edal. Send out patrols. The two young people who
arrived with the Doctor must be brought in.

**[Valley]**

(The savages take Steven and Dodo to a narrow valley bounded on each side by
steep rock walls. On their arrival, a number gather threateningly around
Steven.)  
CHAL: Leave him. We have brought you here only for your safety.  
STEVEN: What have you done for the Doctor?  
CHAL: We can do nothing for him.  
STEVEN: If you don't fight them, you'll always suffer.  
CHAL: Obviously you have never faced the light guns.  
STEVEN: What is this place? Why have we come here?  
CHAL: To hide. That is where we live.  
(Chal points to the openings in the rock walls around them.)  
DODO: Caves? You live there?  
CHAL: Yes.  
STEVEN: Like animals.  
CHAL: Like animals. It is the one place the guards will not follow. Even they
hesitate to go into the darkness of those passages.  
TOR: There is news, Chal. The patrols have been sent out. They are searching
for the strangers.  
DODO: How do you know they're looking for us?  
TOR: They have not touched any of our people, and they are still hunting.  
STEVEN: Did you hear anything about the Doctor?  
TOR: He will have been used.  
DODO: You mean they put him in that glass cell? Steven, what are we going to
do?  
STEVEN: Don't worry, Dodo, we'll find him.  
CHAL: I must warn you, when you do find him he will not be as you remember.
They leave us afterwards only a hollow shell of ourselves.

**[Laboratory]**

JANO: What is his vitality?  
SENTA: It's down to twenty five. We were very careful.  
JANO: And the energy count?  
SENTA: That's high. As a source of energy, his power is remarkably high.  
JANO: And he will recover?  
SENTA: Of course, but it will take time.  
JANO: Very well. And now I wish you to prepare for an in-transference.  
SENTA: So soon?  
JANO: The sooner the better.  
SENTA: You've nominated a number of people to receive part of his life force?  
JANO: No. There will be only one person.  
SENTA: That's most unusual.  
JANO: This is a most unusual experiment, Senta. It would not be right to
jeopardise the safety of any other members of the city. I will take full
responsibility.  
SENTA: You're going to take the in-transference yourself?  
JANO: Yes.  
SENTA: But Jano, is that wise? Anything might happen. We've never seen the
results of such an in-transference before.  
JANO: It is for that reason that I will take the risk. I shall be ready when
you need me.

**[outside the City]**

EDAL: Keep to your own division, Exorse. You're too far over. This is section
K4. You should be beyond the scrubland. Go and see if they've tried to reach
the Valley of Caves.  
EXORSE: Very good, Captain.

**[Valley]**

(The valley lookouts spot Exorse approaching.)  
STEVEN: What is it?  
CHAL: A patrol is coming this way.  
TOR: I have warned you. they are looking for you.  
DODO: Will they come here?  
CHAL: Possibly.  
STEVEN: Where can we go?  
TOR: There is no place where you are safe.  
CHAL: Be silent! You will be safe in the caves.  
TOR: No, Chal! You cannot take them into the caves. The guards would follow
and then our last refuge would be gone.  
CHAL: They have helped us. We must help them.  
TOR: No! They are not our people. They must not be allowed in the caves.  
CHAL: I am the leader and I say they may go.  
TOR: Very well. Our destruction will be on your hands.  
CHAL: You will remain here. Come with me, quickly.  
(Chal and Wylda lead Steven and Dodo up a narrow path to the caves.

**[Cave entrance]**

(An unexpectedly wonderful chamber carved out of the rock, with colourful
murals decorating the walls.)  
CHAL: Nanina, do not worry. They are friends.  
WYLDA: They helped me.  
DODO: It's beautiful. Like a little temple.  
CHAL: This is where we live. It is the one spot on this island which we can
call our own.  
STEVEN: But who's made all this?  
CHAL: Our people have done it.  
STEVEN: It's superb!  
CHAL: Our ancestors were great artists. As time passes, we are less able to do
such things. Most of our talents have been taken from us. Only our faith
remains, and that they will never take.  
WYLDA: Look out. The patrol is coming.

**[Valley]**

(Despite the warning, Tor is cornered.)  
EXORSE: Stay where you are. Where are they?  
(He points his light gun at Tor.)  
EXORSE: Next time, I will take you away. I asked you, where are the strangers?  
(Unable to help himself, Tor glances towards the cave.)  
EXORSE: Up there, are they? Right.

**[Cave entrance]**

NANINA: What is happening?  
CHAL: He is coming this way.  
NANINA: Go back. I will watch.  
EXORSE [OC]: You have the two strangers. Tell them to come here.  
NANINA: There are no strangers.  
STEVEN: Let me see what's going on.  
NANINA: Stay down there!  
STEVEN: How many guards?  
NANINA: There's only one, but he has a gun.  
DODO: What's he doing now?  
NANINA: It's no use. He's coming here.

**[Cave]**

STEVEN: Isn't there any other way out of this place?  
CHAL: There are the passages but they don't lead anywhere.  
DODO: You mean we're trapped?  
CHAL: No, no, no. They will give us a chance. There are many passages and he
may not know which one to follow. Come with me.  
(Exorse hesitates outside the cave.)  
EXORSE [OC]: This is an order. Bring out the strangers. I know they are there.  
(Chal leads Dodo and Steven deeper into the rock, past several openings to a
tunnel at the very back of the cave.)  
STEVEN: What will happen to him?  
CHAL: They can do no worse than they have done before.  
DODO: We don't want to bring any more suffering on your people.  
EXORSE [OC]: Very well, I will come and get them myself.  
CHAL: Quickly! This way.  
(Steven and Dodo follow Chal into the tunnel.)  
EXORSE: The strangers, girl, where are they? Tell me or you will suffer.  
NANINA: I will tell you nothing.  
EXORSE: After I find them, I shall teach you to obey.  
(Exorse moves inside, sweeping his light gun across the huddled savages
cowering against the walls.)  
EXORSE: Where are they? Very well. I shall take you back in their place.  
NANINA: Don't talk.  
SAVAGE: They have gone into the face of the rock!  
(In the passage, Dodo's foot catches a loose stone and the sound echoes.)  
STEVEN: Shhh!  
(Exorse looks into each opening, but cannot work out which tunnel the others
have taken. Nanina tries to get between Exorse and his victim.)  
EXORSE: Which opening? Which opening? Get back!  
(The man points to the correct passage.)  
NANINA: You have betrayed them.  
SAVAGE: But he would have taken me.  
(Exorse heads off down the dark tunnel.)

**[Tunnel]**

DODO: Where does this lead to?  
CHAL: Only further into the rocks.  
DODO: There's no way out?  
CHAL: No.  
DODO: Listen.  
STEVEN: I don't hear anything.  
CHAL: I'm not sure. Come on.  
(All are now aware of footsteps and the whine of the light gun behind them.)  
DODO: Isn't there any place to hide?  
CHAL: Shh. Remember the echo.  
STEVEN: But she's right though. We don't stand a chance if all the passages
are as narrow as this.  
CHAL: I can promise nothing, but he may not follow.  
STEVEN: How much more of this passage is there?  
CHAL: Very little, but it is our only chance.  
EXORSE [OC]: I know you are there, strangers. There is no escape for you. It
will be better for you if you turn back now.  
DODO: It's no good, Steven.  
EXORSE [OC]: Do you hear me?  
STEVEN: What's that?  
CHAL: It is the last bend. After that, there is nothing.  
STEVEN: Go on.

**[Cave]**

TOR: Where are they now?  
WYLDA: They've gone into the rock.  
TOR: And the guard?  
NANINA: He has followed. He showed him the way.  
TOR: Chal should not have brought the strangers here. They will punish all of
us.  
NANINA: But the strangers helped us.  
TOR: What good is that if they make the leaders angry?

**[Tunnel]**

(Reaching a dead end, Steven, Dodo and Chal crouch in the gloom.)  
EXORSE [OC]: Come back, strangers. There is no escape.  
STEVEN: Then come and get us.  
CHAL: He knows we are here  
STEVEN: If I can get him angry, he might do something rash. Come on, soldier
boy, what are you frightened of? You've got the gun.  
CHAL: He will destroy us all.  
STEVEN: How will he do that?  
CHAL: With the gun.  
STEVEN: Tell me, how will he use it?  
CHAL: What does it matter.  
STEVEN: Hurry up, I've got to know. Tell me, how does it work?  
CHAL: They shine the liquid light beam on us and we cannot move.  
STEVEN: Does the beam reflect?  
CHAL: How do you mean?  
STEVEN: If the light from the gun reflects, does it still work?  
CHAL: Yes, yes, I've seen it from the water of the lake.  
STEVEN: Quick, Dodo, give me that mirror. Now come on, get on the floor, both
of you.  
CHAL: It's no use!  
EXORSE [OC]: You are foolish to think you can defy me. Have the people of the
caves not told you? You cannot resist us.  
STEVEN: We're going to change all that, soldier boy. Come on, what are you
frightened of?  
EXORSE: The travellers from beyond time are indeed foolish people.  
(He fires his light gun along the tunnel wall as Exorse advances.)  
STEVEN: Keep down!  
CHAL: Don't let it shine on you. Don't let it touch your eyes.  
STEVEN: Quiet.  
DODO: It's coming closer.  
EXORSE [OC]: Now do you understand, strangers? We are masters.  
CHAL: We must go. We must obey.  
STEVEN: Hold him, Dodo. Hang on to him. This might just work.  
CHAL: It is useless, stranger.  
STEVEN: Well done, Dodo. Now for it.  
EXORSE [OC]: I will give you no more orders. You will step into the light.  
(Steven thrusts Dodo's mirror into the path of the ray and the light beam
reflects directly back into Exorse's face. He freezes and drops the light gun.
Steven snatches up the weapon, turning it on its owner.)  
STEVEN: Right. Now turn. Back along the passage. Come on, move.  
CHAL: He has taken the guard prisoner. It is impossible.

**[Cave]**

NANINA: They're coming back.  
TOR: We should not have angered him. What will happen to us? He has taken them
prisoners.  
NANINA: It's the guard!  
TOR: He has the gun.  
NANINA: We're safe.  
STEVEN: Right, tie him up. Make him a prisoner.  
TOR: You can destroy the people of the city. They can destroy our enemies. The
strangers must be gods.

**[Control room]**

TECH 1: Are we to release him into the outer world as with the others?  
SENTA: He is not one of the savages. He couldn't look after himself. No, he
will be kept here. The Elders intended to give him the guest apartments. He
must be taken there. Assist him. Treat him with great care. He is most
valuable to us.  
TECH 1: I understand, Senta.

**[Senta's laboratory]**

JANO: You are ready?  
SENTA: Yes. I've sent my assistants away.  
JANO: You are right. It is most important that we keep this in-transference
secret until we know the results. I don't wish to alarm anyone.  
SENTA: Shall we begin?  
JANO: I am ready.  
(Senta guides Jano to the in-transference booth, a recess partitioned off by a
glass panel. The panel slides aside and Jano steps through. The booth contains
an odd-looking chair which is connected to banks of complex equipment. Jano
connects electrodes to his temples and over his heart. He's done this before.
A cylindrical helmet mounted on a pivoted arm lowers onto his head.)  
SENTA: May all go well. I shall switch on when you give me the signal.  
(Jano immediately signals his readiness, and Senta closes the glass panel,
sealing Jano inside the booth. Senta switches on the machinery, and the huge
vats start to bubble and churn. The clear liquid within them begins to turn
cloudy, fading first to grey and then darkening to black. The cubicle where
Jano sits begins to fill with gas. Senta checks the readings and makes slight
adjustments. Everything seems to be going well.)

**[Cave]**

TOR: We should kill him while we have the chance.  
STEVEN: He's more use to us alive.  
TOR: They have killed many of our people. It will be justice.  
NANINA: Leave him.  
TOR: Why do you pity him, Nanina? This is the guard that took you. Think what
they do even now to the old man.  
STEVEN: And if we're quick we may still be able to help the Doctor..  
TOR: It is too late. There is nothing we can  
CHAL: Be silent! What do you wish us to do?  
STEVEN: Show us how to get into the city.  
CHAL: There is a way, but it is dangerous. It is always guarded.  
STEVEN: I can handle the guards with this. Just show me how to get in.  
NANINA: And once you're in?  
STEVEN: Dodo and I can find the Doctor.  
CHAL: Do you know where he is?  
DODO: We were supposed to go to the guest apartments.  
NANINA: It will not be possible.  
STEVEN: We must try.  
CHAL: Very well, I will show you. But we must hurry.  
STEVEN: Guard your prisoner. Make sure he doesn't get away.  
NANINA: Good luck go with you.  
(Chal leaves with Steven and Dodo.)  
TOR: The safest way to deal with him is to kill him now.  
(Tor swings a club at Exorse.)  
NANINA: You heard what Chal said! I shall call him back!  
(Tor throws down the club again and goes away to sulk.)  
NANINA: Has he hurt you?  
EXORSE: Not much.  
NANINA: Let me see. I shall make sure it is clean.  
EXORSE: You're the girl I brought into the laboratory.  
NANINA: Yes.  
EXORSE: Why did you stop him?  
NANINA: It would do no good to kill you.  
EXORSE: What is your name?  
NANINA: Nanina.  
EXORSE: I shall remember.

**[outside the City]**

(Hiding in undergrowth, they watch a guard at his post.)  
CHAL: The entrance is there. It opens into a passage which leads to the
laboratory.  
STEVEN: Can you be sure?  
CHAL: Oh, yes. It is the way we leave when they have taken our strength away.  
DODO: Get down.  
(The guard sits down by the door, and placing his light gun on the ground at
his feet, begins to eat some fruit.)  
STEVEN: He doesn't look as though he expected trouble.  
CHAL: Our people have been oppressed for so long the guards have grown
careless.  
STEVEN: All right, we'll make use of that. How close in do I have to go before
this becomes effective?  
CHAL: Just a little further.  
STEVEN: Right. You two stay here.  
(Steven creeps forward. The guard hears noises.)  
GUARD: Hello, there? Is that you, Exorse?  
(Too late, the startled guard scrambles for his weapon. Steven fires his light
gun.)  
STEVEN: Dodo, Chal!  
(The guard goes rigid and drops to the ground.)  
STEVEN: Get his gun.  
CHAL: Switch off your light.  
DODO: He's flat out.  
CHAL: The light must have hit his eyes. It is as if he was struck by a club.
He will be like this for a long time.  
STEVEN: How do we open the door?  
CHAL: It's simple.  
(Chal steps forward to break a light beam across the entrance, and the door
slides open.)  
STEVEN: Right. Chal, take this fellow up into the bushes. We don't want anyone
to find him here. Then wait for us.  
CHAL: What will you do?  
STEVEN: Dodo and I are going inside.  
(Dodo takes the light gun dropped by the guard, and she and Steven move
cautiously through the doorway.)

**[Laboratory]**

SENTA: In-transference completed. Pressure restored. Are you all right, Jano?
Jano!  
(The glass panel slides back but the gas still obscures Jano.)  
SENTA: Jano?  
(Senta is concerned. He checks dials and adjusts some controls. The helmet
lifts from Jano's head but he continues to sit motionless. Finally Jano
becomes aware of his surroundings.)  
SENTA: Are you all right, Jano?  
(Jano appears distracted. He stands and gazes around the room, chin held
high.)  
SENTA: For a moment I was afraid that  
JANO: Hmm? What's all the fuss about? I'm quite all right. The trouble with
you people on this planet is that you don't  
SENTA: What do you mean, Jano? You belong to this planet. You're one of us.  
JANO: One of? Yes, yes of course. I'm afraid I'm not quite myself.  
SENTA: I understand. You must rest, Jano. I shall give instructions that
you're not to be disturbed.  
JANO: Hmm! An excellent idea. After an experience like that, one takes time to
become adjusted. I suppose my two young friends  
SENTA: Avon and Flower?  
JANO: Good gracious, no, no, no. Steven and Dodo, the child with the
ridiculous name.  
SENTA: The strangers?  
JANO: Oh, strangers to you, perhaps, but I have known them both for  
(The leader is obviously discomposed. He stares around, trying to make sense
of his surroundings.)  
JANO: Yes, yes, of course. The strangers.  
SENTA: I will leave you, Jano.  
(Senta leaves, and Jano eyes the machinery with disgust.)  
JANO: Hmm! So, I'm in this dreadful place, am I? Well, I'll soon do something
about their equipment.  
(Snatching up a hefty measuring rod, Jano raises it above his head, preparing
to smash the instruments. Then he freezes, his brow creasing in confusion. The
rod falls from his grasp.)  
JANO: What's happened to me? What's happened to me?

**[Corridor]**

(Steven and Dodo make their way along the metal corridor deeper into the city
complex.)  
DODO: Steven, there's something wrong. It shouldn't be so easy to get in.  
STEVEN: Chal and his people will be too terrified to break in.  
DODO: Surely they should have some security?  
STEVEN: Maybe they thought one guard was enough.

**[Control room]**

(Edal and Senta are watching every move Steven and Dodo make on the monitors.)  
EDAL: They're not going to give us much trouble. Just a little bit further and
they'll have no chance to get back.  
SENTA: It looks as though they're stopping.

**[Corridor]**

DODO: Steven, there's something strange. I don't want to go on.  
STEVEN: It's our only chance. We've got to find the Doctor.  
DODO: Listen.

**[Control room]**

EDAL: We just have to coax them in a little.  
(Edal reaches for a microphone.)  
EDAL: Hello, guest apartment control. Captain Edal speaking. Conduct time
traveller number one to the end of emergency corridor U3.

**[Senta's laboratory]**

(Jano also hears the announcement.)  
EDAL [OC]: You are to leave the Doctor there by himself. Take him there
immediately. This is urgent.

**[Corridor]**

DODO: This is the corridor I was in before. There's a T junction just ahead.  
STEVEN: Can we get into the laboratory that way?  
DODO: Yes.  
STEVEN: Come on.  
DODO: All right.

**[Control room]**

GUARD [OC]: Time traveller number one in position.  
EDAL: Good. Release him. Stay out of sight until I give the signal.

**[Corridor]**

DODO: Here's the T junction all right. (groan) There's someone there!  
STEVEN: Yes, you're right. Stand by.  
(Clutching their light guns, Dodo and Steven turn the corner.)  
STEVEN + DODO: Doctor!  
DODO: Oh, it's wonderful to see you.  
STEVEN: Doctor, are you all right? How did you get here?  
DODO: Why doesn't he answer?  
STEVEN: Are you all right, Doctor? (groan) Come on. We're going to get you out
of this place.  
DODO: He's not moving. Steven, give him a hand.  
(Steven and Dodo take an arm each and guide the Doctor back along the
corridor. Edal watches from the control room. He leans forward and presses a
button.)  
STEVEN: What was that?  
DODO: The door!  
(Ahead, a door begins to slide shut, blocking their escape route.)  
STEVEN: Dodo, quickly!  
(Together, Steven and Dodo struggle to hold the door open.)  
STEVEN: Doctor, come on now. You can get through!  
DODO: Steven, I can't hold on much longer.  
STEVEN: Doctor! Doctor!  
(The Doctor stands motionless. They've no choice but to allow the door to
slide closed.)  
DODO: What have they done to you?

**[Control room]**

EDAL: Guards to emergency corridor U3. Use destructive vapours as protection
against the light guns. Move up behind.

**[Corridor]**

DODO: Look!  
(Ahead a swirling cloud of gas is rolling slowly towards them.)  
STEVEN: There's someone behind it!  
(Steven fires his light gun into the vapour.)  
DODO: That's no good, Steven. We've got to get out of here.  
(Steven desperately seeks a way to trigger the door mechanism.)  
DODO: Oh, quickly, Steven. It's getting nearer.  
(As the choking cloud billows around them, Jano enters the now-empty control
room and watches the scene unfold on the monitor.)  
DODO: I can't see anything.  
STEVEN: We've got to go through it, Dodo.  
DODO: I can't.  
(Dodo reels back, gasping for breath. As armed guards wearing face masks close
in, Steven fights for air, hammering desperately on the door.)  
STEVEN: Come on, Dodo.  
DODO: I can't.  
(Behind them the Doctor stands immobile, apparently oblivious to the chaos
around him.)

__**Episode 4**__

**[Corridor]**

STEVEN: It's no good, Dodo. I'm sorry.  
DODO: Help me, Steven. This stuff is choking me.  
EDAL: Throw the light guns into the vapour.  
STEVEN: No, don't, Dodo!  
DODO: Steven, I can't breathe. Do as he says.  
(Dodo throws down her gun.)  
STEVEN: You fool!  
EDAL: The other light gun. Throw it immediately.  
DODO: Steven, give him the gun.

**[Control room]**

(Watching on a monitor.)  
JANO: No, don't, my boy. Don't give it to them.  
(As if of its own accord, Jano's hand reaches for the control panel beside
him.)

**[Corridor]**

DODO: Steven, look! The doors are opening.  
STEVEN: Quick, Dodo. Get the Doctor out!  
DODO: What about you?  
STEVEN: Do as I say. Don't worry about me.  
DODO: Come on, Doctor.  
STEVEN: Come on. Right, now you get back!  
(Steven fires his light gun, forcing the guards to retreat.)  
SENTA: What happened? Did they escape?  
EDAL: Who opened the doors?  
(Edal rushes back towards the control room. Jano takes his finger off the door
button. As the vapour clears, Steven retreats into the safety of the scrubland
as the door slides closed.)  
SENTA: Someone has helped the strangers to escape. Give the alarm!

**[Control room]**

EDAL: You! You opened the doors.  
JANO: Don't be ridiculous, young man. Why would I do that? You seem to forget
that I am in charge here. Why would I do anything to help our enemies?  
EDAL: Well, no, but if you didn't do it  
JANO: If? Kindly remember to whom you are speaking. I am. (pause) Get back to
your work, Captain.  
EDAL: What about the strangers? You want us to go after them?  
JANO: The strangers? Oh yes. Yes, instruct B Patrol to make ready.  
EDAL: I'll take charge of them myself.  
JANO: No, Captain, you will not. I will lead the patrol.

**[Scrubland]**

(Steven and Dodo are struggling to carry the Doctor between them.)  
DODO: Doctor, please. You must try to go on. Oh, please try. Is there any
sign?  
STEVEN: No, not yet, but they're bound to be following.  
DODO: Oh come on, Doctor. Come on.  
STEVEN: It's no good.  
DODO: Doesn't he care what happens?  
STEVEN: He doesn't even know.  
DODO: Look out!  
STEVEN: It's all right, it's Chal.  
CHAL: How did you get him away? I did not think it was possible.  
DODO: Look at the state he's in.  
CHAL: Yes, I've seen many of our people like that. That is how they leave us.  
STEVEN: Will he recover?  
CHAL: Yes, but it takes time.  
STEVEN: Where can we hide him, Chal?  
CHAL: No place is safe, but it's best to take him to the caves.  
(The sound of a light gun.)  
STEVEN: Quickly, they're right behind us. Chal, you and Dodo, get the Doctor
to the caves. I'll try and hold them back.  
DODO: But what can you do?  
STEVEN: I can delay them for a little while. Now, go on. You're going to need
all the time you can get.  
DODO: Good luck, Steven.  
(Chal and Dodo move off with the Doctor, and Steven takes cover.)

**[Ridge over the scrubland]**

(Jano and Edal lead a party of four guards. Edal is very suspicious of Jano.)  
JANO: That way. The strangers may have done one of two things, Captain. They
may have tried to get back to their spaceship, or they may have gone on to the
Valley of Caves. I suggest we split up. Take two men and see if the strangers
have tried to reach their machine. I will go on to the Valley.  
EDAL: You two, guard the strangers' space machine.  
JANO: You are not going with them?  
EDAL: I will come with you, Jano. I think you may need my help.  
JANO: Very well.  
(Jano leads and Edal follows with the two guards.)

**[Scrubland]**

(Steven watches the group come into view and takes careful aim with the light
gun. Catching sight of movement ahead, Edal grabs Jano and drags him under
cover.)  
EDAL: Look out!  
JANO: How dare  
(Just as Steven fires. His beam hits one of the guards squarely in the eyes,
knocking him out.)  
EDAL: The strangers! Just one of them. He's over there behind those rocks.
We'll have to split up and work round the side of him. You take that side, and
I'll take this. Jano, you can watch him from here.  
JANO: Right.  
(Steven realises that he's outnumbered and out manoeuvred, and as the guard's
light gun plays across the rocks above him he crawls away back into the bushes
and out of sight.)

**[near the Valley]**

DODO: Will Steven be all right?  
CHAL: Who can tell? He is a brave man.  
DODO: Are we nearly there?  
CHAL: It's not far to the Valley of the Caves.  
DODO: If only the Doctor would move faster.  
CHAL: You must understand he's not himself. It's as though he were asleep
still. Help him. Do not be angry with him.  
DODO: I'm sorry.

**[Scrubland]**

(Edal and the guards circle around, closing in on Steven's hiding place, only
to discover that there is no one there. Jano hurries over to them while from
his new hiding place Steven takes aim.)  
JANO: What happened?  
EDAL: He's not here. He's playing for time. The longer he can delay us, the
more chance they've got of getting the Doctor to the caves.  
JANO: Look out, Edal!  
(Sound of a light gun.)  
EDAL: Come on!  
(As Edal and Jano move away, Steven takes aim once more. He fires, then beats
a hasty retreat.

**[Valley]**

DODO: Chal, we've done it! There's your cave.  
CHAL: What are my people doing? There is no guard.

**[Cave]**

(Nanina takes water to Exorse, who is tied up in one corner.)  
NANINA: Drink this.  
EXORSE: Thank you.  
NANINA: Let me see your head.  
EXORSE: I'm all right.  
TOR: It's a pity I didn't kill him when I had the chance. People of his kind
must be destroyed if there is to be any hope for the rest of us.  
NANINA: We will not save ourselves that way, Tor.  
TOR: You hear her? Nanina protects our enemies. This is a dangerous man. What
do we do, let him go so he may attack us again? Or do we get rid of our
enemies to help ourselves?  
NANINA: Chal is our leader. He and the strangers have given us orders that
this man is not to be hurt.  
TOR: I never trust the strangers, and Chal is not here.  
NANINA: All right, Tor. I am here.  
TOR: You would fight for this man, Nanina? How can an enemy mean so much?  
CHAL [OC]: Tor, where are you?  
NANINA: It's Chal!  
CHAL [OC]: Where's the guard?  
(Nanina runs outside.)

**[outside the Cave]**

CHAL: Help him.  
NANINA: Where is the other stranger?  
CHAL: He will come.

**[Scrubland]**

(Steven breaks cover and makes a run for the valley. He's spotted by the
guard. Dodging the beams, he unwittingly places himself in Jano's line of
fire. Jano raises his light gun, then hesitates. Steven disappears from sight
as Edal arrives.)  
EDAL: How did he get away?  
JANO: You must ask your guards.  
EDAL: We will be too late. They will be in the valley by now.

**[Valley]**

(The Doctor is being helped up the path when they hear someone running towards
them.)  
DODO: There's someone coming! It's Steven.  
STEVEN: Get him inside, quick! They're right behind me.  
EDAL: There they are. Fire!  
(Steven takes up a defensive position at the cave mouth and fires on the
patrol.)  
STEVEN: Get him into the back of the cave, quick, and give him some of those
capsules.  
DODO: Which capsules?  
STEVEN: Those that we gave to the savage.  
DODO: Yes, I forgot.  
(Chal and Tor join Steven outside the cave, watching as the patrol enters the
valley.)  
STEVEN: Somebody's moving.  
CHAL: It's their leader, Jano.  
(Jano is climbing down into the valley, apparently oblivious to the danger
he's in. As they watch he stumbles and falls to the ground.)  
TOR: Quickly, fire now. Shoot!  
(Suddenly the Doctor knocks Steven's light gun aside.)  
DOCTOR: Not at Jano.  
STEVEN: Doctor, what are you doing?  
DOCTOR: You must not harm Jano.  
TOR: But he is their leader.  
DOCTOR: Please carry out my instructions, and do not harm Jano.  
(Below them, two of Edal's guards hurry forward and help Jano to safety.)  
TOR: It is too late now.  
CHAL: Yes. Take him down.  
DODO: Doctor.

**[Cave]**

STEVEN: Here, take this. Go on, take it!  
(Steven passes a light gun to Tor.)  
STEVEN: Don't use it unless you have to.  
DODO: Are you all right, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Yes, I think so, my dear. I must have fallen into some kind of a coma.
It was as though, as though all my powers were being sapped.  
CHAL: You have let their leader escape.  
DOCTOR: Where am I? Where am I?  
STEVEN: These are the cave dwellings where Chal and his people live.  
DODO: We've got to get back to the Tardis.  
DOCTOR: No. No, my dear, no, no, we can't leave yet. No, we've got a lot of
work to do.  
STEVEN: Work?  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, I don't intend to leave these people in this oppressed
state.  
STEVEN: Well, you're never going to convince the elders that Chal and his
people should be treated like human beings.  
DOCTOR: Yes, you're probably right, my boy. I shan't even try.  
CHAL: Well what are you going to do?  
DOCTOR: I am going to destroy the power that they hold over you.  
STEVEN: Destroy the laboratory?  
DOCTOR: Yes, precisely.  
STEVEN: But how are we going to get in? They'll be waiting for us this time.  
DOCTOR: All we need is one friend from the other side.  
NANINA: But that is not possible.  
DOCTOR: I think we have him already, my dear.

**[Valley]**

JANO: It is getting dark. I want you to return to the city.  
EDAL: Leave you here alone?  
JANO: Yes. I shall be all right.  
EDAL: I can't do that. I refuse to.  
JANO: I am still your leader, Edal, and this is an order. Tell Senta and the
elders that I shall return with the strangers as prisoners.  
EDAL: I obey, under protest.  

[Cave entrance]

STEVEN: They've gone.  
DOCTOR: All of them?  
STEVEN: It's hard to tell. It's too dark.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I think you will find they've left one behind.  
STEVEN: I'll stay on guard.  
DOCTOR: Yes, well, there's no need to, my boy.  
CHAL: You speak in riddles. You say they have left one behind, but we do not
need a guard? I, I  
DOCTOR: That is correct. We'll wait until it's dark, and then I think we shall
have a visitor.

**[Laboratory]**

SENTA: But you shouldn't have left him there, Edal.  
EDAL: I was forced to. He's acting very strangely. He's not at all himself.  
SENTA: Are you sure?  
EDAL: Jano has changed.  
SENTA: That's a dangerous accusation to make.  
(Senta is interrupted as several of the Council of Elders arrive.)  
SENTA: Dare you repeat it in front of them?  
EDAL: I was ordered to return here by Jano. Elders, I believe we are about to
be betrayed.

**[Cave]**

(Night falls in the valley. The Doctor, Dodo and Steven are gathered with the
savages around a smoky fire, listening, waiting. It's not very long before
they hear someone climbing up the cliff path outside.)  
DODO: There's someone coming.  
(Steven draws his gun.)  
DOCTOR: There's no need for that, my boy.  
STEVEN: Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Shush, shush, shush, shush.  
JANO [OC]: Don't be alarmed. Is the Doctor there?  
CHAL: It is Jano.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I am here, Jano. We were expecting you.  
(As Jano enters the cave the savages shrink away.)  
DOCTOR: Tell your people they are quite safe, Chal. Jano comes as a friend.  
CHAL: Do not be afraid. We must trust this man.  
JANO: How do you know that I come as a friend?  
DOCTOR: Oh, my dear Jano, it wasn't difficult. I knew you were to undergo the
in-transference yourself.  
JANO: You knew that?  
DOCTOR: Yes, an unknown experiment. And you're not the type of man to allow
others to take risks.  
JANO: You're right, Doctor. And now tell me, what has happened to me?  
DOCTOR: It's all very simple. You wanted my intellect. You got it, and along
with it, you received a little conscience.  
STEVEN: Conscience?  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes. You see, Jano is now saddled with the sense of right and
wrong, which makes him an explosive element in a civilisation such as his.  
STEVEN: Is this true?  
JANO: It must be. All I know is that since the experiment I have not been sure
of myself. I have grown aware of the evil that we have done and I am
determined to end it.  
CHAL: You are going to help us?  
JANO: Yes.  
TOR: Your friends would never agree.  
JANO: I know. I will not try to persuade them.  
DOCTOR: Jano has another plan.  
JANO: How did you know, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: I think it's like mine.  
(Ignored by the others, Exorse has worked to free himself.)  
CHAL: Hold him!  
(Exorse sprints to the cave mouth. Steven fires too late. Exorse disappears
into the darkness.)  
STEVEN: He's gone.  
TOR: If he gets back, that will be the end of your fine plan.  
DOCTOR: We must take that chance.  
(Nanina runs from the cave.)  
TOR: Nanina!

**[Scrubland]**

(Exorse is making his way cautiously. Hearing sounds, he picks up a heavy
branch and swings it, just missing Nanina.)  
EXORSE: Why did you follow?  
NANINA: If you betray Jano, what will become of us?  
EXORSE: It is Jano who is the traitor.  
NANINA: What have you learnt, Exorse? That we are people like yourselves. What
chance will we ever have if you speak.  
EXORSE: You think I can keep silent about what I've heard?  
NANINA: You owe me your life, Exorse. I have a right to ask you. If you are
against us now, you condemn us forever.  
(Exorse goes on his way, leaving Nanina alone.)

**[Laboratory]**

SENTA: I promised Jano that I would tell no-one about the in-transference, but
now I must. It appears that Jano has absorbed dangerous ideas from the Doctor.
What can we do?  
EDAL: We can no longer trust Jano. He is not fit to lead us. I will take
command. Declare an emergency. We must be ready for Jano.  
(Exorse enters.)

**[Cave]**

JANO: Everyone must do as I command. You too, Doctor. No one will turn back.
And now we must move.

**[Laboratory]**

EDAL: You were a prisoner in the cave?  
EXORSE: That is correct.  
EDAL: Jano. I left him there alone. He had some plan.  
EXORSE: I did not see him.  
SENTA: According to Captain Edal, Jano is no longer to be trusted. He has gone
over to the savages.

**[outside the City]**

JANO: Come on, get a move on there. Come on, get along.  
(The Doctor leads, with Dodo, Steven, Chal, Nanina and Tor following. Behind
them are several other savages and directing them all, forcing them ahead with
a light gun, is Jano. He uses the weapon like a whip, herding his prisoners
forward, shouting and cursing.)  
JANO: Come on.

**[Laboratory]**

EDAL: Are you sure, Exorse, you have nothing further to report?  
EXORSE: Nothing, Captain.  
EDAL: Strange, very strange. We'll see what the interrogators can get out of
you.  
EXORSE: Only the leader has the right to send citizens to the interr  
SENTA: Captain Edal has called an emergency. He has taken over the leadership
in the absence of Jano.  
JANO: In the absence of Jano?  
SENTA: We did not expect you back here.  
JANO: Why not? Did I not say that I would be back with prisoners. Bring in the
strangers.  
(The line of prisoners is brought in under guard.)  
SENTA: So you were wrong, Edal. Captain Edal informed us that you had gone
over to the enemy, Jano. He has tried to take your place.  
JANO: Put the Captain under arrest. Both of you.  
EDAL: I demand to be heard.  
JANO: You will be heard at the right time and place. Take him away.  
(Edal is escorted from the room by two guards.)  
SENTA: We apologise, Jano. We thought that something had happened to you
during the in-transference.  
JANO: Seal off the doors.  
SENTA: Are we to prepare these savages for transference?  
JANO: Seal off the doors.  
SENTA: What's happening? I insist upon knowing.  
JANO: You will find what I going to say very difficult to understand. All the
Elders of our city are here, and so is the source of our supremacy on this
planet. No man easily gives up the means which give him power.  
SENTA: I don't understand you, Jano.  
JANO: That is what I am asking you to do. I want you to destroy all this.  
SENTA: What? The laboratory? The generators?  
JANO: All the machinery which we have used to destroy our fellows.  
SENTA: They are not our fellows, Jano. They are the savages. They are not
capable of development like us.  
JANO: How do you know?  
SENTA: All history proves it. The savages are good only to provide us with
energy. The laboratory must not be destroyed.  
JANO: These people whom you call savages are our equals. What we have done to
them is wrong. If you will not destroy all this, then I must.  
(Jano picks up a metal bar and smashes it down on the control panel next to
him.)  
SENTA: What are you doing? Stop him!  
(Senta dives for the alarm button.)  
JANO: This is our only chance to start life afresh on this planet. Help me!  
SENTA: Well, don't just stand there! Use your gun.  
NANINA: Help, Exorse. It's the only way to help us all.  
(Exorse turns to smash the nearest console.)  
EDAL: Open the doors! We cannot get in.  
(Trapped outside, Edal and his guards try to break down the door. This fuels
the savages desire to destroy the laboratory. They turn on the equipment with
an enthusiasm to wreck it as thoroughly and quickly as possible. Several of
the Elders try to intervene, but they are no match for them.)  
DOCTOR: You know, my dear, there's something very satisfying in destroying
something that's evil, don't you think?  
DODO: Yes!  
(Senta is powerless. The vats are smashed, the energy transfer process ended
forever.)  
JANO: This is only the beginning, Chal. After this destruction, our people
must learn to build a world that they can both live in.  
CHAL: And both sides must learn to trust each other.  
JANO: We may need a new leader. Somebody who can unite us.  
EDAL [OC]: Make sure the strangers don't escape. It is they who have done this
to us! Kill the Doctor on sight. These are my orders!  
(The door gives way and the guards swarm into the room.)  
EDAL: Get Jano! Arrest him.  
(The light beam misses its target and Steven stands to face Edal.)  
STEVEN: Stay where you are! What can you do now? The place is destroyed. Your
power's gone.  
EDAL: You! I should have killed you a long time ago. And you, Doctor. You have
done this to us.  
JANO: Edal, you have no more authority here.  
EDAL: You. You are a traitor. I do not take orders from traitors!  
STEVEN: Drop it!  
(Edal goes to fire but Steven is quicker. Edal falls unconscious, caught in
the blast of Steven's light gun.)  
JANO: Doctor, we already owe you much. (to Steven) And now I owe you my life.  
DOCTOR: Jano, since you have destroyed the power you held over Chal and his
people, you realise now of course, you've got to learn to live together.  
JANO: Yes, but the fear and hatred of the past will only die slowly. We need
someone like yourself as a mediator until we have become one people.  
DOCTOR: I see. But in my case I'm afraid that is utterly impossible.  
JANO: The man we need must inspire trust. His judgements must come from his
heart, even more than his head.  
CHAL: Here is the leader we want, Jano.  
JANO: This is what I thought.  
STEVEN: Just a minute. I couldn't.  
DOCTOR: A great honour, dear boy.  
STEVEN: But I can't walk out on you and Dodo!  
DOCTOR: Just think of the challenge to be able to set up the people of this
planet for a new life. You're quite ready for this task.  
STEVEN: You think I can do it?  
DOCTOR: Yes, I do. And you're the only man who can, my boy.  
STEVEN: Has the offer come from both sides?  
CHAL: You would give us new hope. Our people will become great again. We will
learn to live as equals without bitterness.  
STEVEN: What about Tor?  
TOR: I should accept your decisions.  
STEVEN: Very well. I will stay.  
CHAL: Thank you, thank you. (to the Doctor) And thank you. You have justified
our faith.  
(Dodo hugs Steven.)  
DODO: Oh, Steven.  
STEVEN: I shall miss you both, Dodo.  
DODO: I shall miss you.  
JANO: Doctor, for many light years we looked forward to your arrival on this
planet. We always knew of your wisdom, but we never dreamed of the miracle
that it would bring us.  
DOCTOR: Thank you, Jano. And if ever you need the benefit of my wisdom again,
I trust and hope you will allow me to express myself with my own free will,
rather than place me in an oven, and try and cook it out of me.  
JANO: Come, Chal, we must summon our people. There is much work to be done. We
shall await you in our Council Chamber.  
(Jano and Chal lead the others away, leaving Steven alone with Dodo and the
Doctor.)  
DOCTOR: Well, I must say, young man, I'm very proud of you.  
STEVEN: Doctor, I don't know if I  
DOCTOR: I know, I know, my boy. Well, go on, you mustn't keep them waiting.  
STEVEN: Goodbye, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Goodbye, Steven, and good luck.  
(Steven leaves.)  
DODO: Doctor, do you think we'll ever see him again?  
DOCTOR: Well, who knows, my dear. In this strange complex of time and space,
anything can happen. Come along, little one. We must go. We mustn't look back.  
(The Doctor and Dodo cross the scrubland to the Tardis, and it
dematerialises.)

_Next Episode - The War Machines_  
  
---  
  
<Back to the episode listing

Doctor Who and related marks are trademarks of BBC . Copyright  1963,
Present. The web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment
purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

