**The War Machines**  

Original Airdate: 25 Jun, 1966  

__**Episode One**__

**[Fitzroy Square, London]**

(The Tardis materialises on a pavement, startling the pigeons. The Doctor and
Dodo come out and he hangs an 'Out of Order' sign on the Tardis door. A
policeman is walking along the street.)  
DOCTOR: Well, I suppose you know where you are, my dear.  
DODO: London. Home. It's marvellous to be back. It seems ages since I left.  
DOCTOR: Oh, when you've seen the ages that I've see, you won't use that term
quite so freely. Anyway, I don't think it's been all that long.  
DODO: Hey, what's that for?  
DOCTOR: Oh, well, you see, the problem is, coming back to the twentieth
century, my dear, the Tardis, I'm afraid, is often mistaken for the real
police box.  
(The policeman reads the sign and walks on.)  
DODO: I see what you mean.  
DOCTOR: Yes, and fortunately he can't get in.  
DODO: If only he could. Scotland Yard whipped off into time and space.  
DOCTOR: So that's it!  
DODO: What? Oh, the tower. It's finished!  
(The brand new Post Office Tower rises high above central London.)  
DOCTOR: Isn't that interesting. Very interesting.  
DODO: It's great, isn't it. Stephen would have liked it here.  
DOCTOR: You know there's something alien about that tower. I can sense it.  
DODO: Smells okay to me. Good old London smoke.  
DOCTOR: I can feel it's got something sort of powerful. It's. Look at my skin.
Look at that. I've got that pricking sensation again, the same. Just as I had
when I saw the Daleks, those Daleks were near.  
DODO: Daleks? Who are they?  
DOCTOR: Oh, er, yes, of course, you, er, you didn't meet them, did you, child?
No. No, and I pray that you never will. I really must investigate it.  
(The Doctor and Dodo set off for Cleveland Street.)

**[Brett's laboratory]**

(A collection of computers at the top of the Tower.)  
BRETT: Things are running all right?  
(The lovely  Anneka Wills answers him.)  
POLLY: Yes, Professor.  
BRETT: Good.  
(A mustachioed man leads Dodo and the Doctor out of the lift.)  
GREEN: It is a splendid view, certainly. I think you'll enjoy it.  
DODO: Doctor, look at it. Isn't it terrific!  
GREEN: Professor Brett.  
BRETT: Ah, Doctor! I understand from Major Green you're a specialist in
computer development.  
DOCTOR: Well, hardly a specialist, sir, but I dabble, yes, I dabble. Oh, so
that's what it is.  
BRETT: I beg your pardon?  
DOCTOR: Yes, you know I had a very strong sense of energy outside this
building, a sort of magnetic pull if you like. It was most unusual, so I
presume that's what it must have been.  
BRETT: It is indeed. It's my life's work, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Most ingenious.  
BRETT: I think I can go so far as to say that it's the only one in existence
in the world. It's at least ten years ahead of it's time.  
DOCTOR: Is that so?  
DODO: What makes it so special?  
BRETT: Well, Miss, er?  
DOCTOR: Oh, ah, my secretary, Dodo Chaplet.  
BRETT: Well, Miss Chaplet, I'll explain. This is perhaps not the biggest
computer in the world, but it's certainly the most advanced. In fact it can
handle scientific problems well outside the range of any other computer in
existence. We are about to link this up with computers all over the world as a
central intelligence. A sort of problem solver.  
DODO: I don't understand.  
BRETT: Well, perhaps it'll be clearer tonight.  
DOCTOR: Oh, tonight, sir?  
BRETT: Yes, of course. Press conference. I thought your visit?  
DOCTOR: Oh yes, yes, yes, yes, of course, my dear fellow, yes, eh Dodo?  
DODO: I call that very exciting.  
BRETT: Exciting. Look, this is my secretary, Polly.  
DODO: Hello, Polly.  
POLLY: How do you do.  
BRETT: Now Polly's pretty smart, a cracking typist, right? (Polly pulls a
face) Also rather a cheeky one at times. Well now this machine, which I call
WOTAN.  
DOCTOR: You call what?  
BRETT: "Vo tan." Spelt W O T A N. Will Operating Thought ANalogue.  
DOCTOR: Oh, yes, yes, quite so.  
BRETT: Well now, WOTAN can not only think faster than Polly or myself, it can
also type faster.  
DODO: True?  
POLLY: Afraid so, and it never makes mistakes, wretched thing!  
(Dodo goes off with Polly.)  
DOCTOR: Are you seriously telling me, sir, that you have invented a machine
that can think?  
BRETT: Yes.  
DOCTOR: And never makes mistakes?  
BRETT: Never.  
DOCTOR: I take it that I speak into here.  
BRETT: Yes, that's right, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Er, what is the square route of 17422?  
(The machine whirrs, then prints a number on a piece of paper.)  
BRETT: Correct?  
DOCTOR: One moment please. 131 point 993. Yes, that's near enough. Yes, it's
truly remarkable.  
DODO: May I try it now?  
BRETT: Certainly, go ahead.  
DODO: Now let's see, you funny looking contraption. Here's one you'll never
get. What does the word Tardis mean?  
(Dodo tears off the printed answer.)  
DODO: Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Well, what did it say my dear?  
DODO: Got it right. Time And Relative Dimensions In Space.  
DOCTOR: Good heavens! Let me see. Well now, how would it know that?  
BRETT: WOTAN knows a lot I don't know. There's something else I can tell you,
Miss Chaplet. Miss Chaplet?  
(Dodo has gone still, her face is blank.)  
DOCTOR: Dodo!  
DODO: Pardon?  
DOCTOR: What's the matter my dear, are you All right?  
DODO: Oh, yes. Just a buzzing in the ears.  
DOCTOR: Oh. Just sit down a moment.  
DOCTOR: Now tell me, sir, now tell me, what part does this play?  
BRETT: Oh, that's the usual memory bank, of course.  
DOCTOR: I see. And that of course is the programme regimentator?  
BRETT: Yes, but in this case, a slightly different one.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I wonder  
BRETT: Are you feeling better now?  
DODO: Oh, fine, thank you.  
BRETT: Good. Polly'll look after you.  
POLLY: Is this your first time in London?  
DODO: Oh, no. It feels like it though. I'm so out of touch. What I'd really
like is to go to the hottest night spot in town.  
POLLY: Oh well, that's easy. The Inferno.

**[Inferno club]**

(A makeshift basement club, and a dance record is on the turntable. It must be
the best, the guys are in suits and ties. Polly and Dodo come down the
stairs.)  
POLLY: Hi, Kitty.  
KITTY: Hello Polly, love. Oh, am I glad to see you!  
POLLY: Dodo, this is Kitty. Kitty, Dodo.  
DODO: Hello.  
KITTY: Hi, Dodo. Polly, you're just the person I need. Will you help me?  
POLLY: Oh, here we go again. Not that I mind helping people. Well, what is it
then?  
KITTY: Well, when you were here last week, do you remember a sailor at the end
of the bar?  
POLLY: Not especially, why?  
KITTY: He's been here ever since. Poor lad, he just sits there at the end of
the bar. Look out, here he comes now.  
(A serious young man in an able seaman's uniform walks down the stairs.)  
KITTY: Well, see? He's no great advertisement for the most with it place in
town, is he? Couldn't you cheer him up just a little?  
POLLY: All right, Kitty, leave it to us. Stand by, Dodo. This looks like a
rescue mission. The Navy's in trouble. Excuse me.  
(They head to the bar.)  
POLLY: Well, hello. We met the other night, remember?  
(Here is Michael Craze.)  
BEN: Oh yeah, I think I do.  
POLLY: You think you do? Oh, I must have made a big impression on him.  
BEN: No, it's not that.  
POLLY: Well, what is it then? It must be something pretty big, not to have
noticed me.  
BEN: Well, I'm sorry.  
POLLY: Oh, he says he's sorry.  
BEN: Well there's no law against sitting' here is there?  
POLLY: Well, there should be when you've got that look on your face. Look,
I'll show you.  
(Polly goes to the other side of the bar and mimics Ben.)  
BEN: Is it as bad that then?  
DODO: Worse.  
POLLY: So, spill the beans, sailor. Give us the facts. What's your problems?  
BEN: Ah, you wouldn't understand. You'd think I'm some kind of a nut.  
POLLY: Well, try us.  
BEN: Well, it's my ship, see. It's gone off to the West Indies and I've got a
shore posting. In barracks for six months.  
POLLY: And you'll miss the swaying palms, the white beaches, the blue sea  
BEN: Very funny! If you've finished cheering me up.  
POLLY: Come on, Dodo, let's leave him. I can't stand people with no sense of
humour.  
DODO: Would you like some coffee?  
POLLY: I'd love some.  
(The girls head for the stairs and a mod blocks their way.)  
FLASH: Try me. I got a great sense of humour. Anything for a giggle.  
POLLY: Please take your arm away.  
FLASH: Oh, come on, darling'. I know your type. You'll have a better time with
me than with ol' shorty there.  
BEN: What's that?  
FLASH: Oh get lost.  
BEN: Let her go!  
FLASH: Look, go and play with your toy boats, half pint.  
(Ben gets Flash in an arm lock. Polly screams.)  
BEN: I said, let go of her.  
(Flash gets free and tries to hit Ben, but ends up on his back on the floor
instead.)  
BEN: Just try it, mate. I'll chop you in little bits.  
(Flash swings, Ben grabs his hand and has him on the floor again.)  
KITTY: What's all this?  
BEN: Nothing. One of you customers wants to go home.  
(Flash leaves.)  
BEN: You want to be careful who you encourage.  
POLLY: You conceited little  
DODO: Oh, now, Polly, he was just trying to help. Thank you, er?  
BEN: Ben. Ben Jackson.  

**[Royal Scientific Club]**

(The Doctor arrives by taxi and goes to number 41. The brass plaque says he's
at the right place. There are a lot of reporters with cameras and the big
flash attachments in the room. A graphic on the wall behind the main table
shows Kremlin, Charities, Woomera, Cape Kennedy, Parliament, Eldo, Telstar,
White House, EFTA, RN, RAF, Army, NATO, SEATO and JK all linking to WOTAN.
William Mervyn addresses the assemblage. The Doctor enters during the speech.)  
SUMMER: Gentleman, ladies, may I have your attention please? Well, you're
heard the backroom boys, now it's about time you my turn. C Day, that is
Computer Day, will be next Monday, July the 16th, that is in four days time.
Now on that date all the computer systems in this country, and subsequently in
the whole world will come under the control of this central computer which we
call WOTAN. Now, as you've heard, that will have both peaceful and military
implications. I need hardly tell you that this is a great step forward for
Britain, and indeed I may say, for the whole world. Now, have you got any
questions?  
STONE: Roy Stone, New York Sketch.  
SUMMER: Fire away.  
STONE: Sir, doesn't this put a great deal of power into the hands of whoever
operates WOTAN?  
SUMMER: No one operates WOTAN. WOTAN operates itself. The computer is merely a
brain which thinks logically without any political or private ends. It is pure
thought. It makes calculations, it supplies only the truth. It has no
imaginative powers.  
STONE: Is there no way of fixing it so it can give the wrong answers?  
SUMMER: There would be no point. Now don't forget that a computer like WOTAN
is not a human being.  
STONE: Oh, but surely, sir  
SUMMER: It has no reason to suppress the truth, it has no emotions. It is our
soul.  
STONE: It seems to me by the way you're talking, sir, that this machine can
think for itself like a human being.  
SUMMER: It can. Only much more accurately.  
STONE: But sir, I mean, isn't this kinda risky? I mean, suppose it decides it
can do without people, what then?  
SUMMER: I hardly think it'll come to that. I'm sure that Professor Brett and
his team will have the machine well under control.  
(Summer sits down and turns to his associate.)  
SUMMER: Where the devil is Brett?  
KRIMPTON: He should have met me here an hour ago.  
(John Cater, if you're interested.)  
SUMMER: Well, give him a buzz, there's a good fellow.  
KRIMPTON: Yes, all right.  
SUMMER: Now gentlemen, I must apologise for the absence of Professor Brett.
I'm sure he'll be along in a moment or two if you will just bear with us. It
is, after all, his show.  
(The Doctor peers very closely at the scale model of WOTAN.)

**[Brett's laboratory]**

(Brett is on the telephone.)  
BRETT: I have to go now. I am already very late for an important meeting. Good
night.  
(He puts the phone down, starts to leave, then flips a switch on his intercom.
Green enters.)  
GREEN: You wanted something, Professor?  
BRETT: Have you been here all day, Major?  
GREEN: Yes of course.  
BRETT: Are you sure that this building's properly screened?  
GREEN: If you have any complaints  
BRETT: I have. There's someone in this part of the building.  
GREEN: I'm sorry, sir, not at all possible. We have the complete security
check on this section of the tower day and night.  
BRETT: Are you sure?  
GREEN: Positive.  
BRETT: It's funny. I've had a feeling all day of someone there. Someone
listening to me, watching me.  
(He checks outside the door.)  
GREEN: There's only the two of us in this part of the tower, sir.  
BRETT: I suppose you must be right. I'm sorry, Major. I must be getting tired.  
GREEN: That's all right. Oh, will you be working late tonight, Professor?  
BRETT: No, no. Good heavens, I must be off. I'm late. Thank you, Major.  
GREEN: Goodnight sir.  
(Green leaves. Brett takes another look around the computers. WOTAN changes
it's note.)  
BRETT: This is ridiculous, I must be imagining things. It's quite ridiculous.  
(Brett is pulled backwards to WOTAN, then he goes blank, turns and walks
towards it.)  
BRETT: What do you want?

**[Inferno club]**

(Rhythm and Beat is still playing. Ben, Polly and Dodo return to the bar after
dancing.)  
DODO: I don't think so, I can't. I'm thirsty.  
BEN: Yeah.  
KITTY: Hello, there, bright and breezy now, are we?  
BEN: Yeah.  
KITTY: Steady sailor. Watch it!  
BEN: Same again, girls?  
DODO: Oh no.  
POLLY: Thank you.  
KITTY: Polly, you're a wonder. How do you do it?  
POLLY: Oh, it's just a knack, you know. Anytime you want a bit of brightness
in your life, come to Pol. Mind you, he's a special case.  
KITTY: You can have a job here anytime you like.  
POLLY: I've already got a very good one, thanks.  
POLLY: What's the matter, Dodo?  
DODO: I don't know. I've had a sort of a headache ever since I left your
office.  
BEN: Headache?  
DODO: A sort of high pitched hum. It's gone again now. I'm all right, really.  
BEN: Oh, good. Anyone feel like another dance?  
POLLY: Oh, here we go.  
(Ben and Polly leave Dodo at the bar.)

**[Royal Scientific Club]**

SUMMER: Well, gentlemen and ladies, if there are no more questions? I really
am very sorry about the absence of Professor Brett. I'm sure that it must have
been something very important that prevented him coming. Ah! Professor Brett.  
BRETT: Gentlemen, I am sorry I was not able to attend. It was unavoidable.  
SUMMER: Well now that you're here perhaps you'll talk to the gentlemen  
BRETT: I want to see Professor Krimpton.  
SUMMER: I beg your pardon? They've been waiting.  
BRETT: It's urgent. Professor Krimpton.  
KRIMPTON: See me now?  
BRETT: Immediately, if you don't mind.  
SUMMER: Are you all right Brett?  
BRETT: Quite all right, thank you.  
SUMMER: Well, it is the computer then?  
BRETT: No.  
STONE: Ah, Professor Brett. I'm from the New York Sketch, sir.  
BRETT: No comment. This way, Krimpton.  
STONE: But I haven't asked a question, sir. Can you make a comment  
(Brett and Krimpton leave, followed by the press corps.)  
SUMMER: I'm very sorry, gentlemen, but that seems to be it. Thank of you all
for your time.  
(But almost everyone is already out of the door. Sir Charles' chauffeur hands
him his coat.)  
SUMMER: Thank you. Oh, excuse me, are you the doctor that Professor Brett
telephoned me about?  
DOCTOR: Yes, I am, Sir Charles.  
SUMMER: Oh, well, I'm glad that you could come along. I wonder what on Earth's
got into him this evening? His manner was very odd.  
DOCTOR: Yes, very odd, very odd indeed. Perhaps he's overworking. Who was that
little man, Krimpton?  
SUMMER: Oh, electronics fellow. One of our top men. Come to think of it,
electronics. Perhaps there is something wrong with WOTAN and he didn't want to
let it out? That would explain it, wouldn't it? Look, I'm terribly sorry but
would you excuse me, I think I'd better go and check. Kennedy, will you look
after the Doctor for me?  
DOCTOR: I wonder. I wonder.

**[Brett's laboratory]**

(Green looks inside the empty room and is about to leave when he is drawn
inside against his will. He tries to fight it but is overpowered by whatever,
and stands in front of WOTAN.)  
GREEN: I understand.  
(He picks up the telephone and dials 109.)

**[Inferno club]**

(The bar phone rings.)  
KITTY: Hello, Inferno. What? Who? Speak up! Oh, right, yes. I'll get her.
Dodo, it's for you!  
DODO: Hello? Yes, who is it?

**[Brett's laboratory]**

(Green plugs the telephone into Wotan.)  
DODO [OC]: Hello, who is this? Hello?!

**[Inferno club]**

(Dodo grimaces in pain at a noise coming down the line, then her face goes
blank.)  
DODO: Yes. Yes, I understand.  
(She walks out of the club.)

**[GPO Tower corridor]**

KRIMPTON: Brett! I must say it's rather odd to break up a meeting like that
and drag me off at this time of night!  
BRETT: I had no choice, Krimpton.  
KRIMPTON: No choice? Now what do you mean?  
BRETT: You will soon understand.

**[Tower lift]**

KRIMPTON: Now look here, Brett. I'll stay a couple of minutes. I think it's a
bit much.  
BRETT: Nothing is too much.  
KRIMPTON: What are you talking about? What's the matter with you this evening?
Has the computer broken down?  
BRETT: On the contrary, it's we who have broken down. We have failed.

**[outside Brett's laboratory]**

KRIMPTON: We have failed?  
BRETT: We've reached a standstill. We cannot develop the Earth any further.
Further progress is impossible.  
KRIMPTON: What do you mean, impossible?  
BRETT: That is the conclusion reached by WOTAN.

**[Brett's laboratory]**

KRIMPTON: Are you joking? This machine is hardly in a position to  
BRETT: I'm not joking. WOTAN has decided that the world cannot progress
further with mankind running it.  
KRIMPTON: Oh really? And what does WOTAN propose to do about it, take over
from us?  
BRETT: From now on, we are to serve.  
KRIMPTON: And if we choose not to, I suppose mankind will be eliminated.  
BRETT: If it is necessary.  
KRIMPTON: You've been working too hard, old chap. You've gone completely off
your rocker.  
BRETT: You cannot escape.  
KRIMPTON: Oh dear.  
(Krimpton turns around to find Green standing right behind him.)  
KRIMPTON: Oh Major, thank heavens you're here. He's gone round the bend. He's
gone mad.  
GREEN: He is not mad, Professor Krimpton.  
KRIMPTON: Let me out of here.  
GREEN: You must wait.  
KRIMPTON: I refuse to be kept. I refuse to  
(Krimpton picks up the phone and starts dialing.)  
GREEN: Don't touch that!  
KRIMPTON: You can't leave me here, I'll get, I'll  
(Something makes him drop the phone and pulls him towards WOTAN.)  
KRIMPTON: No, it's not possible. No, I don't believe it! I won't work for you!
I'm human. There's nothing more important than human life. Machines cannot
govern man! I will not  
(But his mind gets taken over too.)  
KRIMPTON: What do you want?

**[Inferno club]**

BEN: Where's your friend, then. Can't see her anywhere.  
POLLY: I don't know. Surely she wouldn't have left without a word to us?  
BEN: I shouldn't think so. She seemed a nice bird, friendly. Not stuck up like
you, Duchess.  
POLLY: Look, don't call me Duchess. I'm worried about Dodo. I'm supposed to be
looking after her. You know, showing her around.  
BEN: You? That's a laugh!  
KITTY: Well, it is our night for surprises. What does he want in here?  
POLLY: Oh, it's the Doctor.  
KITTY: Do you know him?  
POLLY: He's Dodo's boss.  
KITTY: He looks like that disc jockey.  
BEN: Yeah.  
DOCTOR: Ah, I thought I'd find you both here. Well I hope Dodo and yourself
have enjoyed yourselves.  
POLLY: Yes, thanks.  
KITTY: Have one on the house, Doctor. It isn't every day we get the over
twenties in this place. Oh, I dig your fab gear.  
DOCTOR: Fab gear. Who is your friend?  
POLLY: He's not exactly a friend. I've just met him. His name is Ben. Ben, the
Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Ah, yes, how do you do, my boy.  
BEN: Hello, sir.  
DOCTOR: I don't see Dodo about.  
POLLY: I'm afraid she's gone.  
DOCTOR: She's gone? Gone where, child?  
POLLY: Well, she came to answer the phone about half an hour ago, and we
haven't seen her since.

**[Brett's laboratory]**

BRETT: There is one special human brain that WOTAN needs. The task of leading
this brain here to serve WOTAN will be an extremely delicate matter. It has
been arranged.  
GREEN: Someone is coming.  
BRETT: The fourth member called here to receive orders.  
(He opens the doors for Dodo.)  
BRETT: The Doctor's secretary.  
DODO: What are my instructions?  
(The machine makes some groaning noises and then finally produces coherent
sounds.)  
WOTAN: Doctor Who is required. Bring him here.

__**Episode Two**__

**[Brett's laboratory]**

(Dodo leaves.)  
BRETT: Here are your orders. Time is short. Progress is impossible unless
WOTAN takes control within the next few days. Then WOTAN shall decide on the
future of the human race. Who shall live to serve the machines, and who shall
be eliminated.  
(WOTAN's printer springs into life.)  
BRETT: Krimpton, you take that.  
KRIMPTON: London is the first capital to be taken over, then Washington and
Moscow. War Machines must be built immediately.  
BRETT: Further instructions from WOTAN. We shall require skilled labour. A
labour corps will come into operation immediately. Contact will be made by
these people by telephone. When they are on the line, switch them through to
thought control. This is the way each person will be enlisted.  
GREEN: When we have the people where are we to construct the machines?  
BRETT: At central points in London. You, Major Green, will select suitable
places. I shall supervise the initial stages. Suspicion must not be aroused.  
GREEN: I shall attend to this immediately.  
BRETT: You, Krimpton, will work upon a suitable electronic programme for the
new mobile computers. They must be able to move freely and contain their own
power. All computer systems throughout the world must be integrated in WOTAN.  
KRIMPTON: I shall begin this at once.  
BRETT: No. Top priority is to enlist Doctor Who. He has advanced knowledge
which WOTAN needs. Doctor Who must be enlisted into our services tonight.  
WOTAN: Doctor Who is required.

**[Inferno club]**

KITTY: Look, love, I really am sorry about your friend not turning up, but
I've got to lock up now. You can hang a note on the door if you like.  
DOCTOR: Yes, a good idea. Thank you, that's very kind.  
POLLY: I think we ought to go to the Police.  
KITTY: I'd rather not have them round here, if you don't mind. We have got a
licence to think of.  
POLLY: Well, we must do something. I'm going to start phoning the hospitals.
What's her surname?  
DOCTOR: Oh, Chaplet, Dodo Chaplet.  
POLLY: I wonder which the nearest will be?  
BEN: What are you phoning the hospitals for?  
POLLY: Well she might have had an accident.  
BEN: Oh, regular little ray of sunshine. ain't ya?  
POLLY: Well, look, it's better than just sitting around here on our backsides
doing nothing.  
DODO: Hello, Doctor, so you found us all right.  
DOCTOR: Oh, my dear child.  
BEN: Where've you been then?  
POLLY: What happened to you?  
DODO: I've just been around the corner.  
POLLY: But you've been hours.  
DOCTOR: Yes, we've been extremely worried about you.  
DODO: I, er, had a call from some old friends. I just popped along to see
them. Was I really that long?  
DOCTOR: Indeed, you were. You didn't tell me about your friends. And how did
they know that you might be here?  
DODO: Oh, it's a long story. I'm sorry if you were worried.  
DOCTOR: Well, I sincerely hope so. And by the way, my child, Sir Charles
Summer and his family have asked us to pay a visit. So if you'll excuse us, I
think we'd better be off.  
BEN: Yeah, well, I think I ought to get some kip too.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I suppose isn't too late to get a cab, is it?  
POLLY: No, we'll get one outside.  
DOCTOR: Oh, yes, yes, yes, I suppose so.

**[Street]**

POLLY: Goodnight Kitty.  
KITTY: Goodnight, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Er, yes, goodnight my dear. Goodnight, young lady, goodnight.  
BEN: 'Ere, look, wait 'ere, Doctor. I'll go and get you a taxi.  
DOCTOR: Oh, yes.  
POLLY: Wait for me, Ben. I know where we'll find one.  
DODO: They shouldn't have done that.  
DOCTOR: Well, that's very helpful of him, I thought.  
DODO: Oh, yes, you're quite right. Of course it was.  
(Dodo spots two men waiting across the road, holding a bottle and cloth.)  
DODO: You know, Doctor, those two have gone off in the wrong direction. The
taxis are all down there.  
DOCTOR: But, are you sure, my dear?  
DODO: I've just seen three go past.  
MAN: They're coming.  
DODO: Come along, Doctor. We can pick up Polly when we find her.  
DOCTOR: Oh, very well, my dear.  
BEN: Doctor!  
DOCTOR: Oh!  
(A taxi pulls up, and Ben and Polly jump out.)  
BEN: We were lucky enough to score this one for you, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Oh, yes, good boy, good boy.  
DRIVER: Oi.  
(A tramp gets out too.)  
TRAMP: Ta ta then.  
DRIVER: Oi, not so fast. What about my fare?  
TRAMP: I was just about to pay you, my man. Have you got change of a quid?  
DRIVER: Oh, no, not another one. No, I haven't got the change, mate.  
TRAMP: Then I'll just pop over to the all night cafe and get some.  
DRIVER: You're staying right here, mate.  
DOCTOR: Oh, come along, my man. We're in a hurry. Come along.  
DRIVER: Not until he pays. We all know him round here.  
POLLY: I think I've got change. Here you are.  
TRAMP: Thank you, Miss. There you are, my man. Half a crown on the top.  
DRIVER: Thanks. Now be off with you. Right, where to, guv'nor?  
DOCTOR: Eh? Oh, yes, yes. Here. Now look, give him that, my dear.  
(Polly hands over a business card.)  
POLLY: Here you are.  
DOCTOR: Come along. Come along, Dodo. All right, off you go, off you go, off
you go.  
BEN: I'll see you all, then.  
POLLY: Where do you have to get to, Ben?  
BEN: Oh, just to a services club just around the corner. It's all right, I'll
walk.  
POLLY: Right. Listen, if you meet me at the reception of the Post Office Tower
tomorrow, I'll stand you lunch.  
BEN: Yeah, yeah, all right. But I'm no Deb's delight, you know.  
POLLY: I can see that.  
BEN: Yeah, well, goodnight Doctor, goodnight Dodo. See you tomorrow, Polly.  
DOCTOR: Goodbye young man, goodbye.  
DODO: Bye!  
DOCTOR: Drive on.  
POLLY: See you tomorrow.  
BEN: Goodnight.  
(The taxi leaves and Ben walks over to the tramp.)  
BEN: Here, have you got a bed for the night, mate?  
TRAMP: Well, perhaps not what you'd call a bed, after a bit of a meal.  
BEN: Ah, sorry, mate.  
TRAMP: I'm going to doss down in the old warehouse over there.  
BEN: Okay, goodnight.  
TRAMP: It's bloomin' paradise after what I've been used to for the last six
months.  
BEN: Yeah.  
(The would be kidnapper is making a telephone call from a coin box.)  
MAN: She didn't bring the Doctor. Yes, she tried to but they went off in a
taxi. I understand. We will do as you say.  
(The man walks into the warehouse.)

**[Warehouse]**

(Boxes are being delivered.)  
BRETT: This is your blueprint. It must be followed in every detail. The outer
sections are to be constructed at once. The electronic section must be
assembled in this order.

**[outside the Warehouse]**

TRAMP: They've painted out the number. What's been going on around here?  
(He goes inside.)

**[Warehouse]**

(The tramp sees all the activity and keeps out of sight. Brett makes
announcements over a tannoy system.)  
BRETT: The welding of the casing must begin now. Hurry, time is short. This
machine must be completed and armed by tomorrow morning, ready to be
programmed by WOTAN.  
(Something starts beeping.)  
BRETT: Cease work and stand by. There is a warning. Close the doors. There is
a stranger amongst us. He is in north section of the warehouse, bearing two
seven zero degrees, behind cover. He is a danger to us. He must be destroyed!  
(The tramp tries to get away but is stopped by a tractor unit. The workers
close in menacingly.)  
TRAMP: Now look, If you're the law, you got nothin' on me. I'm clean, just
come out. Well, all right, live and let live. I'll find another place to doss.
Night all.  
BRETT [OC]: Cover the door. He must not escape.  
TRAMP: Now what kind of a welcome's this for a bloke what's just come out the
hospital? I won't say nothing, Boss. Here what is this, a nut house? Here, you
keep away from me!  
(He throws his brown paper parcel at them and runs. There is a chase and a
scream.)  
BRETT: Resume work immediately. Construction must be completed by tomorrow
morning.  
(War Machine 9 stands there with its hammer arms and electronic weaponry.)

**[Summer's office]**

(In Whitehall, the Doctor is reading the Times headline Dead Man Found In
Garden.)  
DOCTOR: Good gracious!  
SUMMER: What is it, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Well, just take a look at this, Sir Charles.  
SUMMER: Tramp found dead in Covent Garden.  
DOCTOR: Yes. Three o'clock. That must have been after we left him!  
SUMMER: Did you know the fellow, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: No, we met last night, or rather, early this morning. We used his taxi
which he left in Covent Garden.  
SUMMER: The Police aren't sure if it was a street accident.  
DOCTOR: Oh, yes, it is possible, of course.  
SUMMER: Well, what else?  
DOCTOR: Oh, I don't know, Sir Charles, I don't know.  
SUMMER: Well, if you'd just stop worrying about the indefinable, you might be
able to give me a little advice on a very real problem.  
DOCTOR: Oh, yes? What's this then?  
SUMMER: Letters of resignation from scientists, both of them in my faculty.  
DOCTOR: Oh yes, I see, yes. There's no reason given at all, is there?  
SUMMER: No, that's the strange thing. Now these are two of the best men in
England and I haven't been able to get in touch with them. No one appears to
have seen them since last night. Now isn't it an extraordinary thing that two
such well known men can vanish so suddenly.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I wonder, Sir Charles, do you suppose, er? No, I don't suppose
you would.  
SUMMER: Coffee?  
DOCTOR: No, no, no, thank you.  
POLLY: Good morning, Sir Charles, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Morning, morning.  
POLLY: I'm sorry I'm late.  
SUMMER: Late? Late, what for?  
POLLY: Well, for work. If you'll just show me where your secretary does work,
I'll take over.  
SUMMER: I'm afraid I don't quite understand.  
POLLY: But Major Green told me to come straight round at once as Professor
Brett didn't want me this morning, and your secretary was ill.  
SUMMER: Yes, well my secretary is away today, but how on Earth Brett knew?
Still, I mean, if you're here I'd be very grateful of your help. The office is
through there. I'll be there in a moment.  
POLLY: Right, thank you very much. How's Dodo this morning, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Oh, there she is, child. Perhaps you'd better ask her yourself?  
POLLY: Hello, Dodo, how are you feeling?  
DODO: Quite well, thank you. Hadn't you better start work?  
POLLY: Pardon me for asking.  
DODO: Hello, Doctor. Hope I haven't kept you waiting for me today?  
DOCTOR: No, child, no. You're right on time. Well, I'm sorry, Sir Charles, I
can't help you with your problem, but I'm afraid I'm rather out of touch.  
SUMMER: Yes, well, it's not going to be easy. Men of that quality are very
hard to find. Especially men with their knowledge of computers.  
DODO: Computers? Well surely the person who can tell you all about computers
is Professor Brett. We could call round and see him now.  
DOCTOR: Oh but my dear, I thought you were going to show me round London this
morning.  
DODO: Oh, don't worry about that. Your business sounds important.  
DOCTOR: Oh, that's very nice of you. Yes, very understanding.  
DODO: Right, I'm ready.  
DOCTOR: Ah, I think perhaps I'd better phone his office first.  
DODO: Yes, that might be best.  
DOCTOR: Do you mind if I use the phone?  
SUMMER: Oh, by all means.  
DOCTOR: Thank you.  
(The Doctor picks up the handset.)  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, I want to speak to Professor Brett. Yes, he's at the General
Post Office tower. That's right, yes.

**[Brett's laboratory]**

(Brett answers the phone.)  
BRETT: Yes. It's the Doctor.  
KRIMPTON: Ah, I'll switch him through. Direct to WOTAN.

**[Summer's office]**

DOCTOR: Argh!  
(The Doctor convulses, manages to let go of the telephone and grabs at his
head in pain.)  
DODO: Are you all right?  
SUMMER: Let's get him back into this chair. I'll get Brett's secretary to
phone for an a  
DOCTOR: Oh no, no, no.  
SUMMER: Well a little brandy then.  
DOCTOR: No. Just water.  
SUMMER: All right, I'll get some water.  
DODO: Don't be alarmed, Doctor. This is the method of establishing contact.
Time is very short. Construction has already begun. You are needed.  
DOCTOR: What happened?  
DODO: It's all right, Doctor. You are now one of us. My function was to bring
you in contact. Now I shall serve as an assistant.  
DOCTOR: Oh, what are you talking about, child?  
DODO: Listen, Doctor, construction is taking place at strategic points in
London.  
DOCTOR: What were you saying, my dear?  
DODO: But you took the call. You made the telephone call You made contact,
didn't you?  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, I think I remember, I was speaking to Professor Brett and
all of a sudden there seemed to be an explosion. It very nearly knocked me off
my feet. It was as if, as if  
DODO: What Doctor?  
DOCTOR: It was if something enormous and terrific was trying to absorb me.
Yes, yes, yes. Oh, it's ridiculous, child, isn't it? Yes, yes, yes, there's
something erratically wrong with that telephone, yes. It was just like an
electric shock.  
DODO: Then you received no instruction.  
DOCTOR: From whom, my dear?  
DODO: From  
POLLY: Here you are, Doctor, drink this.  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, thank you.  
POLLY: What happened?  
DOCTOR: That's it. Either that telephone is dangerously out of order, or  
SUMMER: Or what?  
(Dodo is heading for the door.)  
DOCTOR: Stay where you are, my dear.  
POLLY: What is the matter?  
DOCTOR: There's a new and deadly danger facing us. Yes, and it's coming from
Professor Brett's office.  
POLLY: From my office? I don't understand.  
DOCTOR: None of us do. Yet. Come here, my dear. Look at me. Yes, it's just as
I thought. She's been hypnotised. Sit in that chair, my dear.  
(He shines a table lamp into her face.)  
DOCTOR: Now, I want you to repeat after me. My name is Dodo Chaplet.  
DODO: My name is Dodo Chaplet.  
DOCTOR: I resist all attempts to change me into somebody else.  
DODO: I resist all attempts to change me into somebody else.  
DOCTOR: Now, I'm going to start counting. And when I've counted up to five,
you will be fast asleep. And when you wake again, you will forget all about
this distressing incident. Now I'm going to start counting. Just look at that
ring on my hand.  
(He moves his hand up and down.)  
DOCTOR: One. Two. Three. Four. Five. Yes, I think she'll sleep for forty eight
hours, and when she wakes I want absolute peace and quiet for her. Do you
understand?  
POLLY: Are you sure she's all right?  
DOCTOR: Oh yes, she's all right.  
POLLY: Excuse me.  
SUMMER: She can go down to my house in the country. My wife will look after
her.  
DOCTOR: Yes, it's a very fine thing. Yes, and take care of her, won't you.  
SUMMER: Indeed I will. Polly, would. Oh, where has that girl gone to?  
DOCTOR: I don't know. She said something about strategic points in London.  
SUMMER: Strategic points?  
DOCTOR: Where, I wonder? Where?

**[Airport]**

(Boxes are delivered to the BOAC customs transit shed.)

**[Warehouse]**

(Van 9552WY is backed in and unloaded. WM9 is being moved about, bashing into
the light fittings. It flashes its own lights at Green.)  
GREEN: Destructive weapons to be fitted and tested. Prepare for demonstration
of effectiveness. You there. Stay where you are, stand still. Bearing fifty
two. Distance check thirty feet, elevation five feet. Impact, fatal. Take aim.  
(The hapless worker stands still as ordered as WM9 turns to face him.)  
GREEN: Ready to proceed. Observe results. About to fire. Fire!  
(The man falls to the ground.)  
GREEN: Test satisfactory. Effective at thirty feet.

**[Brett's laboratory]**

WOTAN: Where is Doctor Who?  
BRETT: There is no word yet from the person known as Dodo.  
KRIMPTON: Perhaps she has failed in her task?  
WOTAN: Other means must be employed. Doctor Who is required.  
BRETT: There is someone outside.  
KRIMPTON: We must be ready to destroy.  
POLLY: There you are, Professor. Are you all right?

**[Summer's office]**

BEN: Excuse me, sir?  
DOCTOR: Oh, Ben. How did you know I was here?  
BEN: Well, I was supposed to meet Polly for lunch, see, but they told me at
the Tower that she'd come here.  
DOCTOR: Didn't she keep that appointment?  
BEN: No, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Oh, dear me, it's just as I feared.  
BEN: Is there something wrong? Where's Dodo?  
DOCTOR: Oh, she's a little under the weather and she's gone into the country
for a few days.  
BEN: Oh, I'm sorry to hear that.  
DOCTOR: Oh she'll be quite all right, yes, really. I'm rather worried about
Polly. She appears to be missing, that child.  
BEN: Oh, probably gone all snooty on us.  
DOCTOR: No, I think it's far more serious than that. That tramp in the paper.
Did you see it?  
BEN: Of course. I thought I recognised him. He was in the taxi. But how does
this connect with Polly?  
DOCTOR: Well, I'm not so sure that it does, my boy. That's why I want to
solicit your help in this matter. I think, er, I don't think you will arouse
so much suspicion as the police might.  
BEN: Well, just tell me what to do.  
DOCTOR: Well, I want you to investigate in and around that neighbourhood where
we were last night in that club.  
BEN: Oh, yeah. The tramp had a sort of home round there. Well, I'll go right
now.  
DOCTOR: Yes, and be careful, my boy. This might be dangerous.  
BEN: I'll watch it, Doctor.

**[Covent Garden]**

(Workers are unloading fruit and vegetables. Those were the days. The Inferno
Club is closed. Ben goes up to the warehouse door in time to hear)  
GREEN [OC]: Destruction and potency test, stand by.  
(Boom! Ben goes inside.)

**[Warehouse]**

GREEN: Stand by for test on arm action. Testing.  
(The hammer arm smashes a desk.)  
GREEN: Test satisfactory. Stand by for sight test. Commence testing.  
(A searchlight moves across where Ben is hiding behind some crates. He ducks
down.)  
GREEN: Sight to be improved! Thirty yards maximum insufficient. Movement test.
Commence testing.  
(WM9 moves forward until it hits boxes, then WM3 continuity error? starts
hammering at them to clear its way. The Machine goes forward through a load of
grapefruit boxes until it has Ben in it's searchlight backed up against a
wall.)

__**Episode Three**__

**[Warehouse]**

(Green walks up to the machine and Ben makes a dash for a pair of doors.)  
GREEN: This is a warning! Danger! There is a stranger. He must be found and
eliminated at once. Stop your work and start searching immediately. He must be
found.

**[Warehouse room]**

BEN: Polly, what are you doing here?  
POLLY: I came to look for you.  
BEN: What, did the Doctor tell you where I was?  
POLLY: Yes.  
BEN: Look, be careful. Don't go in there.  
POLLY: Why?  
BEN: Well, it's incredible. I must get back to the Doctor and report to him.  
POLLY: What is incredible? What have you seen in there?  
BEN: I can't tell you now, Duchess.  
(An unemotional Polly goes to the doors.)  
BEN: Look, keep back, Polly. I'm telling you, come on.  
POLLY: Why?  
BEN: Because the people in there have gone mad. Well, they seem as though
they've been hypnotised or brainwashed.  
POLLY: What else did you see?  
BEN: There was a mechanical monster. And it moved, it just killed someone.
Come on, we must get out of here.  
(She doesn't move.)  
BEN: Look, Polly, come on!

**[Warehouse]**

GREEN: The stranger is beyond that door, bearing two hundred and fifteen
degrees. He must be taken at once. He is a threat to the security of the War
Machines. On no account must he escape.

**[Warehouse room]**

BEN: Polly, move!

**[Warehouse]**

GREEN: Lock all the outside doors. He must not leave the building.

**[Warehouse room]**

(Polly moves forward and Ben puts the latch on the inner door.)  
BEN: That's it, girl. Now come on, let's get out of here.  
(But Polly is bolting the door to the street.)  
BEN: Have you gone mad? What are you doing? Look, for Pete's sake, Polly, open
it!  
POLLY: I have my instructions.  
BEN: Polly, what's happened to you?  
POLLY: You are not to escape.  
BEN: Look, I've got to get out of here. Come on, get out of the way!  
(He struggles with her but she is determined to do up the bolts.)  
BEN: Look, Polly, get out of the way.  
POLLY: You are not to escape!  
BEN: Must get away!  
POLLY: Help!  
(Two men rush into the room and grab Ben.)  
BEN: Polly, do you know what you're doing? Go and get the Doctor before it's
too late.

**[Warehouse]**

GREEN: Bring him here. The machine will deal with him.  
BEN: Polly, go now! Go and get the Doctor, Polly!  
GREEN: Bring him. The stranger has been spying.  
BEN: Polly!  
(Polly walks into the warehouse.)

**[Summer's office]**

(The Doctor is looking at his pocket watch.)  
DOCTOR: Oh dear, dear, dear, dear, dear.  
SUMMER: Well, take my advice, Doctor. It's no good upsetting yourself.  
DOCTOR: Oh yes, that boy, that boy should be back here ages ago.  
SUMMER: Well, you know what young people are. He's probably been distracted by
something.  
DOCTOR: Well, he seemed quite a responsible young lad. I suppose if he hasn't
phoned it's because he hasn't been, er, well, he has not been able to.  
SUMMER: Well, what do you suppose stopped him? Well, I must say, we've given
him four hours. Perhaps it is time that I asked the police to investigate?  
DOCTOR: No Sir Charles. I don't think we should allow the police to intervene
at the moment. Otherwise we might drive this threat further underground or
wherever it is.  
SUMMER: Precisely. Whatever it is. Oh, damn it, man, you've got no evidence.
We simply cannot let rumour upset the big switch on.  
DOCTOR: Well, unless I'm very much mistaken we're going to have a lot more
than rumour to contend with. Oh, dear me, where is that boy?

**[Warehouse]**

GREEN: You tried to warn human authority of our work in this building. You are
an enemy of mechanised evolution. Nothing must be allowed to prevent the
machines taking over. They are the next stage in the growth of life force of
Earth. All obstacles will be swept aside, including you.  
BEN: Are you all mad?! It'll be your turn next.  
GREEN: We are needed by WOTAN. WOTAN will decide our fate.  
BEN: You are mad. All of you. Look, Polly, can't you see what's happened to
you?  
GREEN: What does the girl want?  
POLLY: I trapped him. I did not let him escape.  
GREEN: That is true.  
POLLY: WOTAN requires all the labour we can find. It is too soon to destroy
this stranger. Let him work and destroy him later.  
GREEN: How do you know what WOTAN wants?  
POLLY: I have just come from Professor Brett. These are his orders and the
orders of WOTAN.  
GREEN: Very well, let him live. He will work for us. We must all work. Go back
to your work.  
BEN: Strewth, that was a close one. Thanks, girl. Well, you really played them
along. You even had me fooled.  
POLLY: You have been spared. Now you must work hard for the success of this
great new cause.  
BEN: Eh? What cause?  
POLLY: The victory of the War Machines.

**[Brett's laboratory]**

BRETT: All War Machines will be ready to attack by noon tomorrow.  
KRIMPTON: Machines have been programmed to destroy any form of human life that
opposes them. The order to attack must come from WOTAN alone.  
BRETT: None are fully completed yet. The Covent Garden machine is now on it's
final tests.  
KRIMPTON: The programming of these machines is near completion.  
BRETT: All War Machines must be disciplined. They must attack simultaneously.  
KRIMPTON: Object of attack, to take over strategic centres and assume control
of all human authority.

**[Warehouse]**

GREEN: Faster! All human beings who break down will be eliminated.  
(Green knocks down one man.)  
GREEN: There is no time for rest. You must follow the example of the machines.  
(The War Machine rolls the body across the floor. Elsewhere, Ben and Polly are
moving boxes.)  
BEN: Are you okay, ducks?  
POLLY: Why do you speak?  
BEN: Well, look at you, you're nearly on the ground.  
POLLY: I'm very well. I am happy to work for the success of the Machines.  
BEN: Look, come off it, love. You can hardly stand up.  
POLLY: That is not important.  
BEN: Oh yeah, sure.  
POLLY: Must not stop. All work must be complete by tomorrow noon.  
BEN: Well, why by noon?  
POLLY: The attack is to begin.  
BEN: Attack?  
POLLY: The takeover of London by the War Machines.  
BEN: Oh that. And you're looking forward to it, eh?  
POLLY: Of course.  
BEN: Yeah, we're all so keen they've even taken the guard off the door.  
POLLY: Naturally. None of us wish to leave. We all wish to stay for the moment
of victory.  
BEN: Oh yeah, victory, that's right. And we'll all be here won't we?  
POLLY: Yes.  
GREEN [OC]: All explosives to be collected here.  
(Mortar bombs are being packed and rifles stacked. Polly is still stacking
ammo boxes. Their eyes meet then she carries on. Ben slips away.)  
GREEN: All explosives to be examined and primed ready for use by noon
tomorrow. Work. Work! The success of the War Machines depends upon us.

**[Warehouse room]**

(Ben finds a crowbar and pries the padlock off the door. He's out into Covent
Garden and away.)

**[Summer's office]**

DOCTOR: Well, I can't wait any longer. I must take a look for myself.  
SUMMER: But, Doctor!  
DOCTOR: After what happened to Dodo, my dear sir, we should never have let
those youngsters out of our sight.  
(A doorbell rings.)  
DOCTOR: That might be Ben now.  
SUMMER: I'll see.  
DOCTOR: Ah, come in my dear. Good heavens.  
(Ben stumbles into the room, gasping for breath.)  
DOCTOR: My dear boy. What's happened to you, lad?  
SUMMER: Are you all right?  
BEN: Yeah, I'm all right.  
DOCTOR: Now, take your time, take your time. Now, where's Polly?  
BEN: She's still there, Doctor. They've got her. She's one of them now.  
DOCTOR: What do you mean, they've got her? Where is she?  
BEN: She's in a warehouse.  
DOCTOR: Where?  
BEN: A warehouse in Covent Garden. And there's a machine, a killer machine.
And if we don't stop it, it'll kill half London!

**[Warehouse]**

GREEN: Where is he? You are responsible for the stranger, where is he? Do you
know what has happened to him? Answer.  
POLLY: He escaped.  
GREEN: How do you know?  
POLLY: I saw him.  
GREEN: You saw him and you did not give the alarm?  
POLLY: No. GREEN: Why not?  
POLLY: I don't know.  
GREEN: You are working for the machines, you are an instrument only. You have
no friends, no will of your own.  
POLLY: Friends. He was my friend.  
GREEN: She has betrayed the WOTAN. She therefore must be sent back to WOTAN to
be punished.

**[Summer's office]**

SUMMER: Don't tell me that you believe this fantastic story, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Well, I'm afraid I do.  
SUMMER: What, that this machine made by man, that it's suddenly come to life?  
DOCTOR: Yes, I had suspected something of that sort.  
SUMMER: Oh, come on, Doctor. The boy's been suffering some sort of delusion.  
DOCTOR: Oh, my dear Sir Charles! How could you know that?  
SUMMER: Because it's impossible. Here, in the heart of London?  
BEN: Look, I'm telling you, it has happened! Don't let's waste any more time
arguing!  
DOCTOR: We are not wasting time, my dear boy. We need Sir Charles' authority,
his help. Without this we can do nothing.  
BEN: Look, Sir Charles, every minute we waste is dangerous. They look as if
they're preparing an arsenal to blow up London.  
SUMMER: Well if this is so, why weren't the police informed?  
BEN: Well I'm tellin' you now, aren't I? I nearly got done, what more do you
want? You inform them. If you don't it'll be on your own head.  
SUMMER: I don't like your tone, young man.  
DOCTOR: I am quite prepared to accept the truth of this boy's statement.  
SUMMER: All right. If you consider it's necessary I'll have a word with the
Commissioner of Police.  
DOCTOR: No, Sir Charles. I think the police might find it too big for them to
handle at the moment.  
SUMMER: Well, that is for them to decide. How many of them were there?  
BEN: About twenty.  
DOCTOR: And you say that they were obeying this machine?  
BEN: Yeah. They said something about 'all machines must be ready by noon
tomorrow'. Then they attack.  
SUMMER: Ah, well, we shall see. It should be a fairly simple matter to
surround this place and arrest twenty people.  
BEN: And who'll do that, the coppers?  
SUMMER: That is what the police are for.  
BEN: But that machine will make mincemeat of them in twenty seconds flat.  
SUMMER: Then presumably they'll send for the army and that'll put a stop to
this machine of yours.  
DOCTOR: I'm afraid we've got all our priorities mixed up. They might be able
to destroy this machine, but in all probability there are others waiting to
attack us.  
BEN: Well, I'm sure there are.  
DOCTOR: Exactly. And we don't know their location. And I doubt very much if we
can find them all by tomorrow noon. No, I think we should strike at what I
believe to be the centre of this menace. WOTAN.  
SUMMER: Oh now I hardly think that'll be necessary. There's no evidence to
link Professor Brett with this machine of yours.  
BEN: No link up? What about Polly?  
SUMMER: I've had quite enough from you, young man. I shall handle this affair
in my own way.  
(Summer leaves.)  
BEN: Well, what's he going to do?  
DOCTOR: Well, I fear we've riled him, my boy. You see, the official mind can
only take in so much at a time. However, we must keep our weather eyes open.
Come along.

**[Summer's study]**

(Sir Charles is trying to make a telephone call.)  
SUMMER: Hello? Hello? Hello, operator? I seem to have been cut off. Ah, is
that you Minister? No? Well for heavens sake, call him out of the conference,
man. This is an emergency! What's that? No, I'm not telling you again. Ah, is
that you, Minister? Yes, yes, this is very serious indeed. Some kind of killer
machine, I'm told. Yes, like a tank. It has about twenty men with it. Yes, I
should say this would call for firearms. Just as well to be prepared. What?
What, you think you might call the army? Well, just as you say, of course. No.
No, well, I've given your man all the details. It's in the Covent Garden area,
I'm told. Fine. Right. Well, I'm off down there right away. Goodbye, Minister.

**[Covent Garden Market]**

(Truck loads of squaddies arrive.)  
SOLDIER: Right, on the double!  
(They wisely put up MOD warning signs to keep civilians out.)  
SERGEANT: These are the bearings, sir. They intersect here.  
CAPTAIN: Yes, that's the building, isn't it, Sir Charles?  
SUMMER: Yes, that's it.  
CAPTAIN: Thank you, Sergeant.  
SERGEANT: Sir.  
CAPTAIN: We've been taking bearings. There's a good deal of radio and
electrical activity there. Have you any idea what's causing it?  
SUMMER: Well I've been given to understand there's a large amount of explosive
in there and a new kind of War Machine. Though how much truth there is in that
I don't know.  
CAPTAIN: And the people inside?  
SUMMER: We don't know how they'll react yet.  
CAPTAIN: Well, they won't get far. We've got a couple of platoons covering the
back of the building, and my lads watching both ends of this road watching the
front.  
SUMMER: Yes, well, I think we'd better have a look inside first. Send some of
your men in.  
CAPTAIN: It's all arranged. There's a patrol standing by. Say the word and
they'll go in and have a look around.  
SUMMER: This, er, might be a little more dangerous than we think.  
CAPTAIN: Don't worry, Sir Charles, my lads can handle it.  
SUMMER: All right, then. When you're ready, go ahead.  
CAPTAIN: All right, Sergeant, stage one.  
SERGEANT: Calling Orange Patrol, calling Orange Patrol. Your objective number
one, reconnoitre and report. Go ahead. Over.

**[outside the Warehouse]**

(A Corporal and his squad crouch by the warehouse door. He reports via walkie
talkie.)  
CORPORAL: Orange Patrol calling. There's no sign of anyone. There's a door
here. Do we go in? Over.

**[Covent Garden Market]**

SERGEANT: Do they go in sir?  
CAPTAIN: Give me that. Hello, Orange Patrol? Search entire building. Take your
time and be prepared for anything. Over.

**[outside the Warehouse]**

CORPORAL: Proceeding into the rest of the warehouse. Out. Take that, follow me
and keep down. Let's go.

**[Warehouse]**

GREEN: Something's happening. We're getting interference There is a new source
of electrical energy close at hand.  
(The patrol enters the warehouse proper. A War Machine moves forward.)  
GREEN: Warning, warning, warning! There are intruders. Warning! Attack!
Destroy the intruders, they must not escape. Cover all the exits. Fire!  
(The War Machine fires.)  
SOLDIER: Look out!  
(The Machine barges through a pile of boxes.)  
CORPORAL: Fire!  
(But the rifles don't work. The squad look for cover.)  
CORPORAL: Fire!  
(The squad is no match for WM3.)  
GREEN: No one must escape. No one must escape.  
(Some workers try to tackle the soldiers themselves, but get bested by the
professionals.)  
SOLDIER: Come on, lads. Let's get out of here.

**[Covent Garden Market]**

SERGEANT: Hello Orange Patrol. Hello, Orange Patrol. Corporal, can you hear
me? Over. I can't raise them, sir.  
(The fighting continues inside as the Doctor arrives. Summer is watching
through binoculars.)  
DOCTOR: What is happening, Sir Charles?  
SUMMER: We don't know yet.  
DOCTOR: And what is in there?  
CAPTAIN: It's one of our patrols.  

**[Warehouse]**

GREEN [OC]: They must not escape.  
(A soldier picks up a wounded colleague and they make a dash for it.)

**[Covent Garden Market]**

CORPORAL: Look out!

**[Warehouse]**

GREEN: They must be destroyed.  
(WM3 smashes the doors down in pursuit of the soldier.)

**[Covent Garden]**

BEN: Something's coming out, sir.  
CAPTAIN: What's the matter Corporal?  
CORPORAL: It's no use, sir. They've wiped us out.  
CAPTAIN: Who did? What are you talking about, man?  
CORPORAL: The machine, sir.  
CAPTAIN: What machine?  
CORPORAL: It's over there.  
(A war machine comes down the alleyway. It sets a stack of crates on fire. The
rifles still do not work.)  
SUMMER: Captain, tell your men to hold their fire.  
CAPTAIN: Cease fire!  
SUMMER: Lend me your loudhailer. Now, listen to me. You are completely
surrounded! Stop the machine and come out. If you try any tricks we shall open
fire again.  
(The machine keeps coming.)  
CAPTAIN: All right, chaps, surround and destroy.  
SERGEANT: Ready to confront the enemy. In your own time, fire!  
(Even grenades fail to detonate.)  
CORPORAL: It's coming here, sir.  
SERGEANT: Fire! Fire, man!  
(The machine gun does not work.)  
SERGEANT: It's no use sir, it's jammed! All the guns are jammed! It must be
that thing.  
CAPTAIN: I don't think it can be stopped, sir. We'll have to evacuate this
place, and quick.  
SUMMER: But we can't leave now. We can't let that thing loose over London.  
CAPTAIN: It's no good, sir. The weapons are jamming.  
SERGEANT: Look out, sir!  
(WM3 continues it's progress.)  
CAPTAIN: Right, everybody back under cover.  
(Everyone makes a strategic withdrawal except for the Doctor.)

__**Episode Four**__

**[Covent Garden Market]**

(War Machine number 3 is faced down by the Doctor)  
SERGEANT: No joy, sir. Even the grenades won't go up. Never faced anything
like this before.  
CAPTAIN: We've got some wombat missiles coming up, if they're in time.  
BEN: Doctor, get back! It'll kill you! Quick, this way!  
SUMMER: Hurry man! Don't be a fool.  
BEN: Come on, Doctor!  
DOCTOR: Wait, my boy.  
(WM3 goes past the Doctor then turns it's back on the army and just sits
there.

**[Public house]**

(News is being given on the television behind the bar. The newsreader is
Kenneth Kendall.)  
KENDALL: Here is a further bulletin on the London emergency. It was announced
a few minutes ago that the machine, which is now being described as the War
Machine, has successfully been put out of action. The City of London has
responded with characteristic calm to the emergency.

**[Studio]**

KENDALL: As yet there seems to be no explanation for this sudden attack. An
emergency cabinet meeting was held at number 10 Downing Street this morning,
and service chiefs were called in. The Ministry of Defence have just made the
following announcement. Further attacks on London can be expected in the next
twenty four hours.

**[Public house]**

KENDALL: The army are standing by at key centres. People are warned to stay in
doors and keep calm.

**[Covent Garden Market]**

(The Doctor is examining WM3.)  
DOCTOR: It's remarkable, truly remarkable!  
SUMMER: Doctor. Doctor, the Minister.  
DOCTOR: Oh, how do you do sir!  
MINISTER: Oh well now, do you have any idea what caused the collapse,
gentlemen?  
DOCTOR: Oh yes, this is all very simple. This is a computer, and this computer
hasn't been completely programmed.  
MINISTER: Can you make that a little clearer, Doctor?  
SUMMER: There, you see, computers depend upon programming. That is, the
information that is fed into it.  
DOCTOR: Exactly, and my guess is this was put into action before it was ready,
sir.  
SUMMER: Because it had to be. Because we launched our attack. You see Mister
Minister, if we had not send those army units in, the maniac behind this
business would have had time to finish the job and I doubt if very many of us
would have been left alive.  
DOCTOR: Well, I hope that we're just as lucky next time, gentlemen. Let me
have that screwdriver, young man.  
MINISTER: Next time? We must locate and destroy any further machines before
there is a next time.

**[Warehouse]**

MECHANIC: Hello Central Control, hello Central Control. This is sector two
calling. We have completed the first stage. Request permission to switch on.  
BRETT [OC]: Permission granted. Switch on to be carried out. Stand by for
testing. There must be no mistakes this time. The disaster of Covent Garden
will not be tolerated again. Proceed.  
(The mechanic brings WM9 to life.)

**[Covent Garden Market]**

BEN: I've searched the warehouse and all round here, Doctor. There's no sign
of Polly.  
DOCTOR: Oh don't worry, my boy. She'll be back.  
BEN: Yeah, but she was in there. What could have happened to her? As far as I
can make out they've got everyone else.  
DOCTOR: My dear young man, I haven't the time to discuss Polly at the moment.
If I'm going to analyse this mechanism I've got a great deal to do. Now. oh
dear, I'm so hot. Wait a minute, let me take this cloak off. Here. Now hold
onto that and don't drag it on the floor, there's a good boy.  
(A key falls to the ground and Ben picks it up.)  
MINISTER: Have you discovered something, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Well, yes, I think I've managed to decode the programme mechanism. And
if I'm right, I think there are eleven others in London, perhaps in an area of
twenty to thirty miles. And this has it's own timing device, this computer.
And I think if my calculations are right, then we conclude that they were
intended to attack at twelve o'clock today.  
MINISTER: Twelve o'clock? Eleven other machines like this? Good heavens,
Doctor, what are we going to do?

**[Warehouse]**

(WM9 is being put through its paces.)  
BRETT [OC]: Stop. Turn plus eight seven degrees. Be prepared to attack when
given the order. There must be no mistakes. Stand by for reaction test.
Testing. On command go towards exit. Move forward. Continue until ordered.  
(The mechanic walks in front of WM9 and gets killed.)

**[Brett's laboratory]**

BRETT: We've been cut off. The machine has destroyed the transceiver.  
KRIMPTON: Programming is at fault. It must be corrected immediately.

**[Covent Garden Market]**

CAPTAIN: We've rounded up everyone in the warehouse, Sir Charles.  
SUMMER: Much trouble?  
CAPTAIN: None at all, sir. They seem like people who've been brainwashed. I've
brought one of them along, sir. I thought you might like to question him.  
SUMMER: Yes, well, I think perhaps you'd better bring him over.  
CAPTAIN: Bring him here, Sergeant.  
SERGEANT: Sir.  
SUMMER: Ah, Minister, if you don't mind I think I'll ask this fellow a few
questions.  
DOCTOR: Just a moment, sir, please. Major Green?  
CAPTAIN: Do you know him, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Yes, of course. Do you remember me, Major Green?  
GREEN: No. I don't. I'm afraid I don't remember anything. Where am I? What is
this place?  
SUMMER: You don't remember anything?  
GREEN: No.  
SUMMER: Do you remember this machine?  
GREEN: Good heavens, what on Earth is this thing?  
DOCTOR: Yes, I think you'll have to have him removed, gentlemen. He may need
medical attention.  
SUMMER: All right, Sergeant.  
SERGEANT: Sir.  
CAPTAIN: All right, you two men go with him.  
SERGEANT: This way, sir.  
(Green is led away.)  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
SUMMER: Look, Doctor, how do you know he's telling the truth?  
DOCTOR: Oh, of course he is. He remembers nothing since he was taken over by
Brett's computer system.  
MINISTER: You seem very positive about that, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I am.  
SUMMER: Well if Brett's at the root of this business, then the sooner we get
in the GPO tower, the better.  
DOCTOR: What do you intend to do there, sir?  
SUMMER: Well, get hold of Brett and get him out of it.  
DOCTOR: That is very dangerous, Sir Charles. And if I may say so, your strong
arm methods have already got us into plenty of trouble.  
SUMMER: I strongly resent  
MINISTER: What do you suggest, Doctor?

**[Telephone box]**

MAN: Quick, give me the police! This is an emergency! Hello? Hello, listen.
One of those machines, it's on the street now! I tell you it is. I've seen it
myself!  
(WM9 turns towards the phone box.)  
MAN: It's out there now. It's seen me!  
(WM9 fires it's weapon at the box and trundles down the street, nudging a
parked car whose radio comes on.)

**[Car]**

RADIO: The following statement has just been issued. A second War Machine has
been reported in London.

**[House]**

RADIO: People are warned to remain in their homes and to keep off the streets.

**[Covent Garden Market]**

RADIO: Under no circumstances should they attempt to attack or impede these
machines. Phone your local police station if you have anything to report. All
radio programmes will be interrupted as further bulletins are issued.  
BEN: They must've built these things all round London. If they've got Polly,
Doctor, they could've transferred her to help at any one of their premises.  
DOCTOR: My dear boy, if we worry about one person we shall never solve
anything, shall we?  
BEN: Looks such a kind old bloke, too, don't he?  
SERGEANT: He's got other things to think about, mate.  
BEN: Yeah, I know, but this bird saved my life, see.  
(Elsewhere, people are fleeing from WM9. Bicycles are abandoned. Sir Charles
receives a telephone update.)  
SUMMER: Where? Battersea? I see. Well, have you had any reports in yet? Good
heavens, it's appalling. Well you stay and get the phone. I'll be back to you.
The second machine is approaching the Battersea power station and it's
creating absolute havoc. Well, we've tried the army. What else is there?  
MINISTER: Yeah. Haven't you anything you can suggest, Doctor? This is urgent.  
DOCTOR: Somehow we've got to get a hold of that machine.  
MINISTER: Get hold of it?  
DOCTOR: Yes, and I think our only one chance is to paralyse the nervous system
of that mechanism. Yes, and if I remember rightly, it will be
electromagnetically controlled. Yes, in other words, gentlemen, we've got to
capture it!

**[Brett's laboratory]**

BRETT: Why are you here?  
POLLY: I've come to submit myself to WOTAN's judgement. I allowed a prisoner
to escape.  
BRETT: WOTAN will consider your case later. If found guilty, you will be
destroyed.  
POLLY: I understand.  
KRIMPTON: For the moment, your help is needed here. Fetch me the plan of
subsidiary computer bank W4.

**[Covent Garden Market]**

SERGEANT: More reports of destruction, sir.  
SUMMER: Oh, Doctor! You must hurry, Doctor!  
DOCTOR: I shall need equipment, Sir Charles. Sufficient equipment to set up a
powerful magnetic field and it must operate effectively within say twenty
feet.  
SUMMER: Won't that be dangerous?  
DOCTOR: Well, I'm afraid that we have no choice, gentlemen.  
SUMMER: And supposing that fails?  
MINISTER: Then we shall turn to other means, gentlemen.  
SUMMER: Right. Well, where is it you want this equipment?  
DOCTOR: Well now, where was it reported last?  
SERGEANT: Approaching west London, sir. This is the area here.  
SUMMER: Good heavens, we shall never locate it in time to trap it.  
DOCTOR: Now just a moment, Sir Charles. Now look. If you close that road
there, this and this, then we can funnel it into here, and there, gentlemen,
we can spring our trap!

**[Street]**

(A police car drives down a road with a loudhailer on top broadcasting this
message.)  
POLICE: You are advised to remain off the streets. This is for your own
safety. Please close your windows and doors and stay inside.  
You are advised to remain off the streets. This is for your own safety. Please
close your windows and doors and stay inside.  
You are advised to remain off  
(In Cornwall Gardens, SW7, a roadblock is being set up. Rolls Royce
registration 4267PP arrives and the Doctor and Summer get out. They go into a
semi-camouflaged hut.)

**Hut]**

SUMMER: Well, it all sounds very ingenious, but I'm afraid I don't understand
it.  
DOCTOR: Oh well, allow me to illustrate, Sir Charles. Now, to set up a
magnetic field I want a four square box formed by four cables.  
SUMMER: But the machine will never cross the first cable.  
DOCTOR: Well exactly! Therefore, we must prepare these three first and then,
when the machine has approached and appeared in that position we connect the
fourth cable and switch on.  
SUMMER: But how do you connect the fourth cable?  
DOCTOR: I shall connect the cable myself.  
SUMMER: Bah, that's impossible. With the War Machine inside? You'll be killed.  
DOCTOR: That is a risk we have to take.  
BEN: You're a bit past that sort of lark aren't you, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: I beg your pardon, young man?  
BEN: Well, I reckon that's a job for me, sir.

**[Street]**

CAPTAIN: How's it going, Sergeant?  
SERGEANT: They're on the last cable now sir.  
CAPTAIN: Oh, good. Then take up your positions and let me know when the
machine's coming.  
SERGEANT: Yes, sir.  
(Ben and some squaddies take up their place with the cable.)  
SERGEANT: It's here now, sir.  
(WM9 comes down the street, firing it's weapons at nothing.)  
DOCTOR: I shall allow it to come within twenty feet, so don't be alarmed, my
friend.  
(WM9 stops just outside the cabled area.)  
DOCTOR: Now wait for it! Until he's in the area! Wait, wait!  
SUMMER: Surely now, Doctor, surely?  
DOCTOR: Not yet, not yet!  
(Finally WM9 moves forward past Ben's position.)  
DOCTOR: Now!  
SUMMER: Come on man, quickly!  
(Ben gets the cable in place before the machine can turn around. WM9 is now
inside a boxing ring of cables.)  
SUMMER: He's done it!  
DOCTOR: Now!  
(WM9 moves back and forth inside the area.)  
MINISTER: It worked!  
SUMMER: Good man!  
DOCTOR: I want you to remain up here, Sir Charles, until I give the signal.  
SUMMER: Right.  
(The Doctor carefully enters the ring. WM9 raises a battering ram.)  
DOCTOR: Ah, temper, temper.  
(The Doctor goes behind it and fiddles with a panel. WM9 falls silent.)  
DOCTOR: Switch off, Sir Charles!  
(Summer joins the Doctor by WM9.)  
SUMMER: What did you do?  
DOCTOR: Well, to coin a phrase, Sir Charles, I neutralised it. Quite a
harmless looking fellow, don't you think? We must find a way to get it down to
Covent Garden.  
SUMMER: Yes.

**[Fleet Street newspaper]**

REPORTER: Hello, hello, New York? Johnny, hi! Listen, the second so-called War
Machine in five hours has just been captured and made safe. Now I gather the
question is, how many more of these machines are there? And is this new threat
to world peace only confined to London?

**[Covent Garden Market]**

MINISTER: Time's getting short, Sir Charles. How long do you think the Doctor
will be?  
SUMMER: I don't even know what he's doing.  
MINISTER: Does he still say they'll attack at noon?  
SUMMER: Yes, he does.  
MINISTER: Well then, I'm afraid that something  
DOCTOR: Well, I think that's about all, gentlemen.  
MINISTER: What have you done Doctor?  
DOCTOR: I've made an important readjustment to aid and change the purpose of
this machine.  
MINISTER: Oh, it sounds as though you've changed its character, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Well, you could say that, of course, yes. I hope it will carry out a
special programme that I've fed into it.  
SUMMER: But will it be successful in stopping these other machines?  
DOCTOR: Well, my dear Sir Charles, we can soon find that out, can't we? Would
you mind just standing back for a moment? Now, my dear Ben, just carry out
what I've asked you to do.  
(Ben disconnects a cable from WM9 and it starts up.)  
DOCTOR: It's quite safe, gentlemen.  
(WM9 trundles off.)  
BEN: But how are you going to use it, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Well, it all started at that Tower.  
BEN: What, the Post Office Tower?  
DOCTOR: Yes, in Brett's office. And I think it will probably end there.  
BEN: Yeah, what about Polly? I think she must have gone back there.  
DOCTOR: Well, I'm afraid we can't check up on that now, my boy. My machine has
to face WOTAN before noon!  
BEN: Right, well, just give me until then.  
(Ben dashes off.)  
DOCTOR: No, no, no, you can't. You won't be able! Oh, you foolish boy!  
(The War Machine heads down Tottenham Court Road.)

**[Brett's laboratory]**

KRIMPTON: All serviceable machines are now standing by.  
BRETT: They must be ready to attack in exactly eleven minutes.  
KRIMPTON: Instructions to all War Machines. Stand by for attack.  
WOTAN: The order to attack will come from WOTAN.  
(WM9 dashes down an alley with the Tower dead ahead of it.)

**[Ministerial Car]**

MINISTER: How will it work, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Well, it will be like the crossing of two electrical currents. My
machine has to face up to Brett's computer, WOTAN.  
SUMMER: And what will happen then?  
DOCTOR: Well, those people that have been under some form of hypnosis will
return to their normal selves.

**[Brett's laboratory]**

(WM9 is entering the Tower whilst Ben is at the top. He bursts in.)  
BEN: Polly, look out!  
BRETT: What are you doing?  
BEN: Quick, Polly, get out of here.  
POLLY: No, I must work for WOTAN!  
BEN: WOTAN's power is finished.  
BRETT: That is not true. You must not make contact.  
BEN: Come on, Polly!  
KRIMPTON: Brett!  
POLLY: No, my place is with WOTAN!  
BRETT: What is it?  
KRIMPTON: A danger approaching!  
(Ben gets Polly in an arm lock.)  
BEN: Look, you know I hate doing this, Duchess, but it's for your own good.  
KRIMPTON: The danger's here!  
POLLY: No, I mustn't!  
BEN: Quick, this way. Down the stairs.  
(Ben and Polly are out of the way when WM9 enters, firing it's weapon.) WOTAN:
You will retire.  
KRIMPTON: Emergency control. Quick, Brett!  
(WM9 fires at WOTAN. Krimpton tries to get at it's control panel but gets
killed.) WOTAN: I am WOTAN! You  
(WM9 fires at WOTAN, and the computer explodes. Brett clutches his head as he
is freed from it's control.)  
BRETT: What? Krimpton?  
DOCTOR: There's nothing you can do for the poor fellow.  
SUMMER: Good heavens! But what about all the other War Machines, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: All immobilised, Sir Charles, waiting for orders. Orders that will
never come!  
SUMMER: Krimpton.  
BRETT: Sir Charles.  
SUMMER: Ah, Brett. Are you all right?  
BRETT: I think so. What's been happening here?  
SUMMER: Yes, well, I think you'd better ask. Oh, where the devil's he gone?

**[Fitzroy Square, London]**

(The Doctor is waiting in front of the out of order police box, looking for
someone. A young woman and a sailor come running towards him.)  
DOCTOR: There you are, my child. It's nice to see you so well again. And you,
my boy, away from that wretched tower.  
POLLY: Never felt better, Doctor, Sir Charles has been looking for you
everywhere. We've got a message from him about Dodo.  
DOCTOR: Oh, yes, I've been waiting around here for her. Where is she? I very
nearly left without her.  
BEN: Left?  
DOCTOR: Yes, er, to the airport, yes. She is well, I hope?  
POLLY: She says she's feeling much better and she'd like to stay here in
London, and she sends you her love.  
DOCTOR: Her love? Oh, there's gratitude for you. Take her all the way around
the world, through space and time, and then  
BEN: Come again, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Er, what? I, er, nothing, my dear boy, nothing. Now, I think you both
want to get away, don't you? Thank you, Polly, very much. Thank you, Ben.  
POLLY: Goodbye.  
DOCTOR: Goodbye. Run along, enjoy yourselves. Yes.  
BEN: Goodbye.  
(Ben and Polly walk off.)  
BEN: Well, the miserable old  
POLLY: Shh, watch him. I'm sure there's something strange about that police
box. Look, he's got a key for it. He's going inside!  
BEN: Key, that reminds me. I forgot to give him this one back.  
POLLY: Come on, we'll do it now.  
BEN: Yeah, but I've got to get back to barracks.  
POLLY: Oh, come on.  
(They run back and Polly knocks on the Tardis door.)  
POLLY: Doctor! What on Earth is he doing in there?  
BEN: Ah look it's locked. Let's forget it.  
POLLY: Hey, Ben.  
BEN: But I've only got a couple of minutes.  
POLLY: Come on!  
(Polly unlocks the door and they both go in. The Tardis dematerialises.)  
  
---  
  
<Back to the episode listing

Doctor Who and related marks are trademarks of BBC . Copyright  1963,
Present. The web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment
purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

