

**Silver Nemesis**  
  
Original Airdate: 23 Nov, 1988  

_Transcribers note - this version is taken from the Silver Nemesis extended
edition video tape, 1993._

__**Part One**__

**[De Flores's villa]**

(South America 22nd November 1988.  
A group of men in camouflage fatigues get out of a jeep and go to into a
Spanish style villa. Actually, it is at Goring by Sea, what an appropriate
name. Inside, Nazi paraphernalia and old scrolls are scattered on a table. The
Ride of the Valkyries blares out as a young man works at a computer. He
completes the data input and the screen tells him - Landing Location Windsor
Grid Ref 74W 32N November 23 1988. Outside on a balcony a silver haired man
stands next to the record player. Everyone say Hi! to  Anton Diffring, the
wonderful German actor. He picks up a modern bow to shoot a macaw in a nearby
tree, then the young man comes out.)  
KARL: Herr De Flores. Herr De Flores. Wonderful news.

**[Lady Peinforte's home]**

(Windsor, England 1638. Okay, actually St Marys House, Bramber, West Sussex.  
In the grounds, a frowning woman in black velvet draws back a long bow while a
man kneels at her feet. She misses the wood pigeon pecking at her lawn.)  
RICHARD: Very good, my lady.  
(The woman goes back inside to where an old man is working out calculations
amid bubbling pots.)  
PEINFORTE: How much longer?  
RICHARD: He cannot hear you, my lady. Shall I  
PEINFORTE: Leave him. There'll be time enough to punish his impertinence when
he's finished.  
(Lady Peinforte takes an arrow from the fire irons.)  
PEINFORTE: Put this with the others. Are you so very feeble? The poison cannot
harm unless the arrow's tip should break the skin. Let who will steal my gold.  
RICHARD: And the silver arrow, my lady?  
PEINFORTE: Leave that to me. You're sure the potion is well mixed?  
RICHARD: On my life, ma'am. I guarantee it.  
PEINFORTE: Good. We await but the calculation. Perhaps the fee will speed
matters.  
(Lady Peinforte takes a bag from the mantlepiece and throws it in front of her
mathematician.)

**[De Flores's villa]**

(De Flores enters the main room to speak to his troops, who have been given
small glasses of drink. They stand to attention.)  
DE FLORES: Gentlemen. I wonder if even you can fully appreciate what this
moment means. You're standing now at the turning point of history. The day of
fulfillment of our mighty destiny is about to dawn. Fifty years ago, I stood
at the side of the Fuehrer himself when he ordered the first giant step to
greatness, just as now the moment approaches for the second and final one. It
will be decisive, for this time, this time we must not fail. Gentlemen, I give
you the Fourth Reich.  
ALL: The Fourth Reich.  
KARL: Herr De Flores, the aircraft is ready.  
DE FLORES: We leave at once.  
(As the men troop out, De Flores goes to a glass display case and removes a
silver bow, then places it in a metal carrying case.  
Out in space, a meteorite containing a statue starts to heat up.)

**[Lady Peinforte's home]**

RICHARD: My lady, there is but the final ingredient for the liquid wanting.
For that I was thinking  
MATHEMATICIAN: My lady? Lady Peinforte? I've finished.  
PEINFORTE: You have the answer?  
MATHEMATICIAN: Yes, my lady.  
PEINFORTE: Quickly, then. Tell me.  
MATHEMATICIAN: The comet Nemesis will circle the heavens once every twenty
five years.  
PEINFORTE: Yes.  
MATHEMATICIAN: It's trajectory, however, is decaying. This  
PEINFORTE: When will it land?  
MATHEMATICIAN: It will circle ever closer until finally it once again strikes
the Earth at the point from which it originally departed, the meadow outside.  
PEINFORTE: When?  
MATHEMATICIAN: When. Oh, yes. Yes, of course. On the twenty third day of
November in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and eighty eight.  
(Is that allowing for the 11 day calendar correction in September 1752 when we
changed to Gregorian?)

**[Black Jack's Mill - garden]**

(The Courtney Pine Jazz quartet are playing to an appreciative audience in
bright sunshine, including the Doctor and Ace \- who is wearing a short
sleeved t-shirt in November?)  
ACE: I could listen to them all afternoon.  
DOCTOR: And so we shall.  
(Ace picks up the Daily Mirror with the headline Meteor Approaches England and
reads the back page.)  
ACE: Have you seen this? Charlton picked up three points.  
DOCTOR: This is my favourite kind of jazz, straight blowing.  
(The Doctor's pocket watch beeps.)  
ACE: I hate people whose alarms go off during gigs.  
DOCTOR: What's this? It's a reminder.  
ACE: Well, go on, then.  
DOCTOR: Well, obviously, at this precise moment it's a reminder to change
course for another destination.  
(He closes the ornately enamelled cover of the digital device.)  
ACE: Where's that?  
DOCTOR: I've forgotten. Oh, we'll have to go back and find out.  
ACE: Oh, Professor.  
(The Doctor walks off while Ace gets Courtney to give her an autograph.)  
ACE: Excuse me, would you mind signing my tape?  
COURTNEY: Not at all.  
ACE: Thanks.  
COURTNEY: Okay.  
ACE: Bye.  
(Ace joins the Doctor.)  
DOCTOR: Don't you find it embarrassing asking for autographs?  
ACE: Not as embarrassing as forgetting what you set your alarm for.  
DOCTOR: Well, I probably arranged it centuries ago.  
(Someone fires a silenced handgun at them from the hedge, but misses.)  
ACE: Doctor!  
DOCTOR: Get down!  
(They crouch, run, and hide by some trees.)  
ACE: Who are they?  
DOCTOR: Couldn't see. Quick, the Tardis.  
(As they run across a wooden bridge, a volley of shots sends them tumbling
into the fast moving water.  
Two men with guns wearing headphones come onto the bridge to check their
handiwork. Seeing no one, they smile and leave. Then the Doctor and Ace
surface, drift downstream a little and climb out.)  
ACE: Hope my tape's all right.  
DOCTOR: Welcome home.

**[Lady Peinforte's home]**

MATHEMATICIAN: I could build a flying machine. Imagine that, my lady. Human
beings flying about like birds.  
PEINFORTE: Bring the cups of potion. We leave at once.  
RICHARD: The final ingredient, my lady? Human blood?  
MATHEMATICIAN: Why, I can change the world.  
PEINFORTE: Ah, yes.

**[Riverside]**

(Ace uses a catapult to fire stones across the river.)  
DOCTOR [OC]: Ace!  
ACE: Yeah?  
DOCTOR [OC]: Duck.  
(Ace ducks. The Doctor shooes a duck out of the Tardis and brings a new
cassette player with him.)  
DOCTOR: No, duck.  
ACE: Oh, great. Now I can play my tape.  
DOCTOR: Afraid not.  
ACE: Why not? It's my tape deck. You built it for me.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I know I built it for you to replace the one that was destroyed
by the Daleks, but  
ACE: So? It's my tape deck and I want to play this.  
DOCTOR: This is more than just a tape deck. And besides, we've more to worry
about than just listening to your tape.  
ACE: Yeah. So who were they, anyway? Who'd want to kill us?  
DOCTOR: I'm afraid there's an infinite number of possibilities. What concerns
me more is my alarm. Got to find out what it was supposed to be.  
ACE: Can't you remember anything about it?  
(He inputs some data into the tape deck.)  
DOCTOR: I'm afraid not. Obviously the arrangements were made in rather a
hurry. They are important. I've given them a terminal rating.  
ACE: Sounds nice.  
DOCTOR: It means that some planet somewhere faces imminent destruction.  
ACE: Crikey.  
DOCTOR: Quite.  
(He finishes his input and a hologram of a planet appears above the tape
deck.)  
DOCTOR: That looks familiar. Earth.

**[Lady Peinforte's home]**

(Lady Peinforte and Richard stand inside a circle of astrological symbols,
dead birds and animal skulls. She holds the silver arrow while They both hold
a goblet.)  
PEINFORTE: Afraid?  
RICHARD: Yes, my lady.  
PEINFORTE: When I employed you, you lead me to believe you were a hardened
criminal.  
RICHARD: As my lady knows, before I entered your service I was found guilty of
a large number of offences.  
PEINFORTE: Then have the courage of your convictions. Drink. Drink!  
(They both drain their goblets. There are flashing lights.)  
RICHARD: What's happening, my lady?  
PEINFORTE: We are leaving, Richard. Destiny beckons. We ride the back of time.  
RICHARD: No. No! No!  
PEINFORTE: Come back, you fool. You'll break the aura.  
RICHARD: I can't! Please, my lady. I must stay.  
PEINFORTE: It's too late.  
(They both scream as an aurora envelopes and Lady Peinforte's home transforms
into -)

**[Black Jack's Mill]**

(A restaurant complete with red checked tablecloths. The customers look up,
surprised as a pair of seventeenth century time travellers appear in their
midst.)  
RICHARD: Where are we, my lady?  
PEINFORTE: Why, the very place we left, of course. My house in Windsor.

**[Riverside]**

ACE: You mean the world's going to end and you've forgotten about it?  
DOCTOR: I've been busy.  
ACE: How long have you known?  
DOCTOR: Well, in strictly linear terms, as the chronometer flies, I've known
since November the twenty third, 1638.  
(A silver spacecraft approaches Earth.)

**[Cellar]**

(The Tardis materialises inside a cellar filled with junk, including a tiger's
head. The Doctor strokes a stuffed bear and catches his hand on its teeth.)  
DOCTOR: Hello. Ow!  
ACE: Look at all this stuff.  
DOCTOR: Yes, that's exactly what we've got to do, look at all this stuff. You
take that aisle.  
ACE: What's it all for?  
DOCTOR: Presents.  
ACE: Nobody gets this many presents.  
DOCTOR: Well, if you were a lady who travelled.  
ACE: I am.  
DOCTOR: Yes, you're not always invited, but you are, you get presents, and
then you need somewhere to store them.  
ACE: Who does it all belong to? I mean, where are we?  
DOCTOR: Windsor.  
ACE: Windsor? We're in the castle?  
(The Doctor holds an African mask up.)  
DOCTOR: This is new.  
ACE: I thought it'd be a lot posher than this.  
DOCTOR: It probably is, upstairs, but we're in the vault.  
(The Doctor has put on a fez.)  
DOCTOR: I'm looking for a silver bow we want to borrow.  
ACE: We can't go nicking stuff in here.  
DOCTOR: It's only temporary.  
ACE: It's probably treason. I'm too young to go to the Tower.  
DOCTOR: Listen, Ace, do I have to remind you that the safety of the world is
at stake?  
ACE: It might make a difference if you'd let me know what was going on,
Professor, but I suppose there's no time.  
DOCTOR: Precisely.  
(The lights flicker.)  
DOCTOR: There's even less time than I thought. Please, let's hurry.  
(The Doctor puts the fez on Ace.)

**[Black Jack's Mill]**

PEINFORTE: Nemesis. She arrives.

**[Cellar]**

(The meteorite crashes to earth by a barn. The Doctor catches a gilt bust that
tumbles off a pedestal.)  
ACE: Was that a bomb?  
DOCTOR: No, that was the return to Earth of a comet called Nemesis that has
been in orbit for exactly three hundred and fifty years.  
ACE: You're amazing, Professor, being able to tell all that just from the
noise.  
DOCTOR: Wasn't difficult, really. It was me who launched it into space in the
first place. This may qualify as the worst miscalculation since life crawled
out of the seas on this sad planet.  
ACE: Nobody's perfect. Hey, is this the bow?

**[Van]**

(The bow is in the case on De Flores's lap. The van stops.)  
KARL: We're almost at Windsor, Herr De Flores. Shall I let the men walk around
a little?  
DE FLORES: No, Karl. We must not keep history waiting.

**[Black Jack's Mill]**

(A police car zooms past, blues and twos on.)  
RICHARD: My lady, what carriage is that?  
PEINFORTE: Hurry. The rogues will have the Nemesis.  
RICHARD: I've not seen the like of it before. We must take care.  
PEINFORTE: Oh, fie.  
(Lady Peinforte smashes the glass door with a chair.)

**[Van]**

(Police are standing by the burning hole in the ground as the van pulls up
nearby.)  
DE FLORES: Nemesis has come to Earth on that piece of ground. In the new era,
all this will be a shrine.  
KARL: The men are ready in two assault groups. I will remain with you. We
await only your order.  
DE FLORES: Very good. Let's drive to the best hotel and refresh ourselves.  
KARL: But Herr De Flores, there are only three policemen. We can take them
now. You young people, always in such a hurry. Well, we were the same. Now,
the statue is inside the meteor, which has just travelled through space. Have
you any idea how hot it will be? How can we handle it? Since the British
Government is completely unaware of its power, I'm sure we can rely on the
police force to guard it safely until we're ready to collect it. I have every
confidence in them.

**[Cellar]**

DOCTOR: The bow was in the case.  
(Ace reads the description.)  
ACE: Ah. This case contained the bow of Nemesis, property of the Crown, which
disappeared mysteriously in 1788. Legend has it that unless a place is kept
for the bow in the Castle, the entire silver statue will return to destroy the
world.  
DOCTOR: For once legend is absolutely correct. It has just returned.  
(The lights go out.)  
DOCTOR: Oh, now this.  
ACE: It's just the electricity.  
(The lights come on again.)  
ACE: It does that sometimes, even in the 1980s. What I want to know is, how
can a statue destroy the world?  
DOCTOR: I'll tell you three hundred and fifty years ago.  
(Ace puts the fez back by the drawing of the statue with its bow and arrow.)

**[Lady Peinforte's home]**

(The Tardis materialises on the upstairs landing, blowing out the candles. The
Doctor and Ace tiptoe out, then Ace sneezes.)  
DOCTOR: Shush.  
ACE: Sorry, Professor.  
DOCTOR: There might be someone at home.  
ACE: Okay, Professor. So where are we now?  
DOCTOR: Windsor, of course. Only a few hundred yards from the Castle.  
ACE: And is it really 1638?  
DOCTOR: It certainly is. And furthermore, don't move.  
ACE: What?  
DOCTOR: Stay where you are.  
(The Doctor goes to the Mathematician, who is slumped over the table, and
covers him up.)  
ACE: What is it?  
DOCTOR: Something you don't want to see.  
ACE: Who does this house belong to, anyway?  
DOCTOR: A lady.  
ACE: She's got funny ideas about home furnishings.  
DOCTOR: Lady Peinforte's nothing if not original. I'm afraid this poor man was
employed for his useful rather than his ornamental qualities. He's a scholar.
He's done remarkably well. In a matter of months since I was last here, he's
calculated the exact time and date when a comet called Nemesis will land on
this planet. The twenty third of November.  
ACE: 1988.  
DOCTOR: And Lady Peinforte's rewarded him with her usual generosity.  
ACE: So the bow belonged to her?  
DOCTOR: Hmm? Oh, no, no. Not to her. To a statue of her. She made the statue
from the silver metal that fell out of the sky into that meadow out there.  
(He goes to the chess board.)  
DOCTOR: Hmm, this game is going rather badly.  
ACE: Professor.  
DOCTOR: Don't worry. There's no one here now, apart from our late friend. Lady
Peinforte's around all right, in Windsor, but three hundred and fifty years in
the future.

**[Crash site]**

(Really the Greenwich peninsular before Tony Blair dumped an expensive Dome on
it. A policeman uses his radio.)  
RICHARD: What means yon fellows? One speaks into his hand.  
PEINFORTE: He summons guards. Oh, this cannot be.  
RICHARD: Why so upset, my lady?  
PEINFORTE: Because, fool, they will protect the Nemesis, and we know not their
strength and weapons.  
RICHARD: But, my lady, they know not what the comet is. Without the arrow, it
is nothing. We must but watch and wait our chance to seize it.  
PEINFORTE: Thou art not in all wise so useless, Richard.  
RICHARD: My lady is too kind.  
PEINFORTE: We shall withdraw and conceal ourselves.  
POLICEMAN: Three one eight to base. Hey look, there's someone inside.

**[Lady Peinforte's home]**

ACE: How can she get to 1988?  
DOCTOR: She uses the silver arrow, of course, and she had some basic
rudimentary knowledge about time travel. Black magic, mostly.  
ACE: Black magic?  
DOCTOR: Mmm, and what you might call a nose for secrets.  
(He sniffs the liquid bubbling in the cauldron in the fireplace.)  
DOCTOR: Oh, dear.  
ACE: So it wasn't just silver, this stuff that fell from the sky?  
DOCTOR: Unfortunately, Lady Peinforte discovered it was something rather more
unusual. A living metal. Validium.  
ACE: Living metal?  
DOCTOR: Yes, with just one purpose. Destruction.  
ACE: But if you launched it into space, how come it's capable of destruction?  
DOCTOR: Later, Ace.

**[Crash site]**

(The police car won't start.)  
POLICEMAN: Don't bother trying again, it looks like the battery's dead.  
(A silver periscope pushes up through the soil.)  
POLICEMAN: Hello? Hello?  
(And more of them. They spray gas and the policemen collapse.)

**[Windsor Castle]**

(A bevy of tourists are on the tour, in front of a sentry box containing a red
coated soldier. Windsor is being played by Arundel, another splendid castle.)  
GUIDE: You see here the guard. They're changed quite regularly. Of course,
they're only changed in winter time. They normally stand here all the time in
summer time. Now, will you follow me, please, ladies and gentlemen?  
(The Tardis materialises by the curtain wall, unnoticed.)  
ACE: I've been here before.  
DOCTOR: D�j� vu?  
ACE: No, with the school.  
DOCTOR: Oh, very droll. I haven't been here since they were building the
place. You remember the way around?  
ACE: Not really. Windsor Castle's a big place.  
DOCTOR: Quite right. What we need's a guide. Come on.  
(They join the tour.)  
GUIDE: Tower, and also further over there is the Mary Tudor Tower. Those
gargoyles have been there for about five hundred years. They were built in
1509 originally, and the  
(The Doctor and Ace follow a sign saying No Admittance, Royal Apartments.)

**[Courtyard]**

ACE: I really don't think we should be doing this.  
DOCTOR: This way? What do you think?  
ACE: I don't know. I might be able to tell if I actually knew where we were
going. We didn't actually cover the Royal residential areas on the school
trip. There's someone coming.  
(A lady with a pack of Corgis around her ankles.)  
DOCTOR: Act as if you own the place.  
ACE: Do what?  
DOCTOR: It always works. We own the place.  
ACE: Doctor!  
DOCTOR: How annoying. I can't place that woman for the life of me.  
ACE: Doctor!  
(Ace pulls the Doctor behind a buttress, then the woman and her dogs go back
inside.)  
DOCTOR: It's all right, Ace. I know that woman from somewhere.  
(Ace whispers to him behind the stone.)  
DOCTOR [OC]: What! Why didn't you say something?  
ACE [OC]: You wouldn't let me.  
DOCTOR: She's just the woman we need. Quick, after her. Ah ha!

**[Landing]**

DOCTOR: It'll be very useful to have the armed forces and the police on our
side, and can you suggest a better person to ask?  
ACE: Come on.  
DOCTOR: There's no alternative.  
(The Doctor is about to knock on a door with a crown on it, when it is opened
by a stern man with beard.)

**[Crash site]**

RICHARD: I am in a nightmare, or mad.  
PEINFORTE: This is no madness. Tis England.  
RICHARD: But the noise, lady. The foul air.  
(Lady Peinforte holds out her hand for the long bow.)  
RICHARD: Yes, my lady. What will my lady do when you possess the Nemesis?  
PEINFORTE: Why, first have revenge on that predictable little man. He will
soon arrive, Richard. Oh yes, I expect him. This time there'll be a reckoning
with the nameless Doctor whose power is so secret, for I have found his secret
out. In good time, I will speak it. I shall be his downfall.

**[Landing]**

DOCTOR: I've got to speak to her.  
SECURITY: Be quiet. We'll have a doctor here soon.  
DOCTOR: But I am a doctor!  
SECURITY: Don't get excited. How did you get in here?  
DOCTOR: I could tell you, but you won't believe me.  
SECURITY: Try me.  
DOCTOR: I travelled through time and space.  
SECURITY: Oh dear, oh dear.  
DOCTOR: Oh yes, very well, then. Let's forget about the armed forces.  
ACE: But the Queen?  
SECURITY: Are you a patient with him?  
ACE: Now, you'd better listen to him, weasel features, 'cos he's the Doctor.  
SECURITY: Oh, is he?  
DOCTOR: Listen, the fate of every living creature on this planet hangs in the
balance.  
SECURITY: I don't believe you.  
(The Doctor puts on a pair of round glasses.)  
DOCTOR: You will believe me. You will let us go. You will not move. (to Ace)
You will move.  
(The security men remain still as the Doctor and Ace head for the stairs.)  
ACE: How did you do that?  
DOCTOR: It's easy once you know how. You have to make a spectacle of yourself.  
SECURITY: Hey!  
DOCTOR: Only trouble is, it doesn't last long.  
(The men with the guns and the ear defenders have arrived at the crash site.
One turns over a tape in his Walkman, then energy zaps their ear phones.)

**[Gallery]**

(The Doctor stops in front of a painting.)  
DOCTOR: Oh look, a Van Dyck.  
ACE: Not now, Doctor.  
(They push through the tour group.)  
ACE: Pardon me, pardon me, pardon me.  
SECURITY: Excuse me.

**[Staircase]**

(The Doctor and Ace make it to the top of another staircase.)  
ACE: What now?  
DOCTOR: Back to the Tardis. We're obviously not going to get any help here.  
(As they run down the stone staircase, Ace stops at a Gainsborough-like
painting of a lady.)  
ACE: Professor, that's me.  
DOCTOR: What? Gosh, so it is. My goodness, what a good likeness.  
ACE: How come I ended up here?  
DOCTOR: Well, it hasn't happened yet.  
ACE: But it's two hundred years ago.  
DOCTOR: I know. We haven't done it. That's why you don't remember it.  
ACE: It doesn't make sense.  
DOCTOR: Well, it did to Louis Armstrong, but then he really understood time.  
SECURITY: There they are. Come on.

**[Crash site]**

(The neo-Nazis arrive and take up positions around the Nemesis. De Flores has
changed into army uniform. His men find the fallen police.)  
KARL: Herr De Flores, I don't understand how the police have already been
overcome.  
DE FLORES: That is of no importance. All that matters is the Nemesis is safe.  
(Karl places the box on the meteorite and opens it. The bow throbs with
energy, and so does the statue inside the rock.)  
DE FLORES: Your strength returns. Soon you will be completely restored. But
where's the arrow? The arrow, where is it?  
(The Tardis materialises by the barn.)  
DE FLORES: Find it. Find it!  
DOCTOR: I only hope we're not to late.  
(The Doctor and Ace run up behind the soldiers.)  
DOCTOR: Er, don't be afraid. We won't harm you.  
KARL: How did you get here? I searched that section, there was no one there.  
DE FLORES: Never mind, Karl. You will see many signs and wonders in the days
to come. Give me the arrow of Nemesis.  
DOCTOR: Fortunately, I haven't seen it since 1638, when it disappeared along
with the good Lady Peinforte.  
DE FLORES: Rubbish. You. Where is the arrow?  
ACE: I don't know anything about it.  
DOCTOR: She really doesn't. Allow me to explain, Ace.  
(The Doctor turns his back on the soldiers and stands in front of Ace.)  
DOCTOR: For the validium to become active, it must have a sufficient quantity
of critical mass. The statue alone is no good without the bow.  
DE FLORES: I have the bow.  
DOCTOR: And the arrow. Now, if someone could put the bow and arrow into the
statue's hands  
DE FLORES: They have the power of life and death, not only over this Earth but
any planet in existence. You seem remarkably well-informed for someone who
claims to know nothing.  
DOCTOR: I simply notice what is obvious. You, apparently, don't.  
DE FLORES: What do you mean?  
DOCTOR: You see those policemen there? They've been attacked by technology
more advanced and more terrible than you could imagine.  
KARL: What technology?  
DOCTOR: And you might also have observed the electricity supply being drained
over the last few days.  
ACE: Like at the Castle?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
DE FLORES: Tell me where the arrow is. I want you to tell me where to find the
arrow!  
DOCTOR: I'm glad to say I can't.  
DE FLORES: Then we will shoot her.  
ACE: Doctor.  
(A silver spacecraft comes in to land.)  
DE FLORES: Wait.  
DOCTOR: Don't move!  
(Figures march out of the spacecraft.)  
ACE: They saved my life.  
DOCTOR: Don't thank them yet. We might live to regret it.  
ACE: What are they?  
DOCTOR: Cybermen.

__**Part Two**__

**[Crash site]**

LEADER: So, Doctor, a new appearance, otherwise our anticipation of your
presence has proved entirely accurate.  
(De Flores' men start shooting at the silver newcomers, with no effect.)  
LEADER: Eradicate them.  
(The Doctor and Ace hit the ground as the Cybermen kill the neo-Nazis.)  
DOCTOR: Take cover.  
(The Doctor runs and dives into the crater made by the Nemesis.)  
ACE: Doctor!  
(She follows him as the battle rages around the grounds.)  
ACE: Doctor, we can't stay here.  
DOCTOR: We certainly can. This exactly the same thing that happened the last
time. Only then it was the Roundheads and Lady Peinforte.  
(Lady Peinforte fires an arrow directly into a Cyberman's chest unit whilst
Richard says fervent prayers.)  
PEINFORTE: A hit. A very palpable hit.  
(The Cyberman dies. It must be a gold tipped arrow then. A second arrow hits
the ground near where De Flores is hiding behind an old car. He examines it
carefully as more of his men are slaughtered. Another Cyberman falls to Lady
Peinforte's golden arrows.)  
PEINFORTE: See how my poison is as deadly as ever, Richard.  
RICHARD: And I shall look after the sick. Which reminds me, I shall return to
Briggs his money.  
PEINFORTE: Get up, fool. I tell thee, Richard, were there men of silver like
these here in our day, my life would have been quite different. Now I'll let
them destroy each other, and then we'll take the Nemesis.  
(An explosion destroys the police car. A dead Cyberman topples into the
crater.)  
DOCTOR: Where did that come from?  
ACE: Didn't see.  
DOCTOR: A Cyberman killed with an arrow? But that's ludicrous, unless. Of
course, the head's made of gold.  
ACE: That's real gold?  
DOCTOR: Yes. The only substance to which they're vulnerable.  
ACE: Classy.  
(Ace tries to grab the arrow but the Doctor pushes her off.)  
DOCTOR: Ah! Gold dipped in poison. Lady Peinforte's calling card.  
ACE: I really think we should be getting out of here, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: I really think you're right.  
RICHARD: My lady, who is that little man?  
PEINFORTE: Oh, glorious evil. It is he.  
(The Doctor snatches the bow from the box on top of the Nemesis and runs for
the Tardis.)  
PEINFORTE: No!  
(She takes aim with her bow, but they get inside just in time. The Tardis
dematerialises with an arrow stuck in the door.)  
DE FLORES: We must retreat. It's our only chance.  
KARL: And leave the statue?  
DE FLORES: The statue alone is useless to them. The bow is ours. Get it.  
(Karl runs to the crater and retrieves the box under fire.)  
LEADER: Bring the bow at once.  
CYBERMAN: The Doctor and the female have escaped with it, Leader.  
LEADER: And that one?  
(It points to a Cyberman with an arrow in its chest.)  
CYBERMAN: Terminated by another human female, using gold.  
LEADER: This must be the Lady Peinforte.

**[Windsor town]**

(Lady Peinforte and Richard walk down an alley to a main street where people
are queuing at a bus stop across the way.)  
RICHARD: My lady, there are people here.  
PEINFORTE: Of course there are people. This is Windsor. Come.

**[Warehouse]**

(The Cybermen have brought the Nemesis into a large warehouse or aircraft
hanger by its crash site, and are cutting into the rock surrounding it.)  
LEADER: Cut the statue free and take it into the craft.

**[Lady Peinforte's home]**

ACE: I don't like this place.  
DOCTOR: We're just passing through, Ace.  
ACE: What happened to the body? It's gone.  
DOCTOR: Yes. Someone's moved the chess pieces.  
(The Doctor rifles through the papers on the desk and produces a small card.)  
DOCTOR: Voila!  
ACE: Is that what we came here for?  
DOCTOR: Our friend the mathematician was a genius, but he needed a little help
to get started.  
(The Doctor burns the paper in the fire.)  
DOCTOR: Cold?  
ACE: I really don't like this place. Can we make a move?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
(He moves a piece on the chess board and they leave.

**[Van]**

(The Cybermen carry the Nemesis, still in some rock, into their spacecraft,
then take off.  
Lady Peinforte and Richard attract the attention of a pair of thugs as they
walk down through Windsor.  
Meanwhile De Flores tips gold dust out of a small bag into his hand.)  
KARL: What is the gold dust for, Herr De Flores?  
DE FLORES: Eventualities.

**[Windsor Great Park]**

(The Tardis materialises next to an old wooden signpost.)  
DOCTOR: Validium was created as the ultimate defence for Gallifrey, back in
early times.  
ACE: Created by Omega?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
(He closes the door carefully, looking at the arrow. Ace is carrying the
silver bow and her tape deck.)  
ACE: And?  
DOCTOR: Rassilon.  
ACE: And?  
DOCTOR: And none of it should have left Gallifrey. But, as always with these
things, some of it did.  
(He takes the bow and holds it out in front of himself at arms length like an
aerial.)  
ACE: So you had to stop Lady Peinforte.  
DOCTOR: Or anyone else.  
ACE: From ever putting the three bits together.  
(They start walking down a track with the castle in the far distance over a
ridge.)  
DOCTOR: Yes, so I launched the largest piece into space.  
ACE: But you got the sums wrong.  
DOCTOR: Look. We're almost there.  
ACE: I'd feel a lot safer and happier inside the Tardis.  
DOCTOR: Well, the Cybermen might find the Tardis. This way, our validium leads
us to their validium.  
ACE: Isn't that a bit old-fashioned?  
DOCTOR: I'm an old-fashioned guy.  
(The Cyber-spaceship comes in to land.)

**[Windsor town]**

(The two thugs confront Lady Peinforte and Richard, itching for a fight.)  
SKINHEAD: You looking at me?  
PEINFORTE: Stand aside.  
SKINHEAD 2: What are you, social workers?  
RICHARD: Out of my lady's way.  
SKINHEAD: We want to tell you our problems.  
PEINFORTE: Will you be turned into rats?  
SKINHEAD 2: We already have been.  
SKINHEAD: Poor ones. That's our problem.  
SKINHEAD 2: Money!  
RICHARD: Money, say you?

**[Crypt]**

(The bow is flashing and humming, and the Doctor and Ace are whistling almost
in tune with it as they walk towards the Castle.  
The Cybermen have brought the Nemesis to a tall folly cum crypt in the ground.
Actually Hiorne's Tower at Arundel. On the wall behind the large stone
sarcophagus is the inscription Death Is But A Door. The Nemesis is starting to
break out of her rock prison.)  
CYBERMAN: The remaining validium approaches, Leader.  
LEADER: As predicted. Activate communications unit.  
CYBERMAN: But the Doctor and Peinforte are still to be destroyed.  
LEADER: Our victory is inevitable. The Doctor will come to us, and Peinforte
is a simple savage accompanied by a terrified peasant.

**[Windsor Great Park]**

(The two thugs have been bound, gagged and are hanging by their heels from a
large tree branch while their clothes burn nearby.  
Elsewhere, Ace sets up the tape deck as an aerial.)  
ACE: What am I supposed to be listening for?  
(There is a loud beep, beep, and the Doctor turns it off.)  
DOCTOR: That. Cybermen communicating.  
ACE: I don't like Cybermen.  
DOCTOR: You should see the ones they're communicating with.  
ACE: Reinforcements?  
DOCTOR: Yes. But if we could only jam their signal. Have you got a tape?  
ACE: Yeah. You mean this thing transmits?  
(She puts the tape into the play deck.)  
DOCTOR: Of course it does. I built it.

**[Crypt]**

LEADER: Commence transmission.  
CYBERMAN: Leader, I must repeat the objection to the transmission of incorrect
information. Our forces do not yet hold all three units of validium.  
LEADER: You are outside your function.  
(The communications globe glows.)

**[Windsor Great Park]**

(The Doctor and Ace are lying on the slope listening to Courtney Pine's tape.)  
DOCTOR: Are we having fun?  
ACE: Yeah.

**[Crypt]**

CYBERMAN: Interference, origin unknown.  
LEADER: Open the monitor channel.  
(Jazz blares out.)

**[Windsor Great Park]**

ACE: That'll keep them busy. Time to go?  
DOCTOR: Oh, I do love a jam session.  
(As the jazz sounds out across the galaxy, the Doctor and Ace start walking
again. Eventually they come across the skinheads still hanging from the tree.
The Doctor gives Ace the bow and runs over to them.)  
DOCTOR: This is ridiculous. Who did this to you?  
SKINHEAD: Social workers.

**[Outside the Crypt]**

(A strange growling yowling noise can be heard.)  
RICHARD: My lady.  
PEINFORTE: Of course I heard it. Am I deaf?  
RICHARD: It sounds like a bear, but worse.  
(Lady Peinforte's silver bow glows.)  
PEINFORTE: See, we're near the Nemesis. Come. The bear will not pursue us.
Such things happen only in the theatre.  
RICHARD: What creatures are these?  
(They are llamas.)  
PEINFORTE: I know not.  
RICHARD: They will eat us. I beg you, my lady, return us to our own time. The
England now is full of terrors.  
PEINFORTE: You're mad! Return without the Nemesis? Never. And without my
knowledge, you cannot return at all. I tell you, Richard, either you assist me
to regain it or I leave thee here forever. Now, come. I think they are
peaceful.  
RICHARD: What place, what place is this?  
PEINFORTE: The piece of ground on which you stand? Well, I will tell thee. It
is thy grave, Richard.  
RICHARD: What?  
PEINFORTE: I ordered you to be buried here when I planned my tomb. See,
there's thy stone.  
(Here Lyeth the Body of Richard Maynarde, departed this life ye 2nd November
1657 in the 51st year of his Age. He saw worlds end and begin.)  
PEINFORTE: If the dogs would not eat thee, I ordered you put out here to
attend me in the next world as in this. There you see is my burial place, and
aptly the silver creatures there do hold the Nemesis. We shall attack.  
(We pull back to see a sign near the llamas which reads - Stay in your car
while in the safari park.  
(The Doctor and Ace look round the trunk of a large tree.)  
DOCTOR: Just in time.

**[Crypt]**

RICHARD: There's nothing here, my lady.  
PEINFORTE: See the arrow? The statue's here, depend upon it.

**[Outside the Crypt]**

LEADER: Now our plan begins to operate. She will find that her crypt has
weathered with age. The fact of her death will drive her insane.

**[Crypt]**

RICHARD: This is your tomb?  
PEINFORTE: Rather fine, is it not? But where is the statue of Nemesis?

**[Outside the Crypt]**

PEINFORTE [OC]: Where is it? Where?  
CYBERMAN: Is this the human condition of madness, Leader?  
LEADER: It is. Kill them.  
PEINFORTE [OC]: It must be here. It must be!

**[Crypt]**

(Richard stands guard with his bow.)  
RICHARD: My lady!  
PEINFORTE: It is here! The arrow tells me. How can this be? Where? Where is
it?  
(Richard looses an arrow at the returning Cybermen.)

**[Outside the Crypt]**

(A Cyberman touches the arrow with a detector.)  
CYBERMAN: Gold!  
(They withdraw. Richard's second shot hits its chest unit and kills it.)

**[Van]**

(De Flores consults a map.)  
DE FLORES: This was once the estate of the infamous Lady Peinforte, in the
seventeenth century.  
KARL: Lady Peinforte? But Herr De Flores, we've seen a woman in seventeenth
century dress today, firing arrows at us and at men of silver.  
DE FLORES: Shut up.

**[Outside the spacecraft]**

(The Doctor and Ace observe the Cyber spacecraft from underneath a hedge. It
is guarded by the two headphone wearing men who knocked them into the river.
Ace sneezes, so the Doctor shakes a branch and whistles like a bird. The men
decide not to investigate.)  
DOCTOR: I don't suppose you've completely ignored my instructions and secretly
prepared any Nitro Nine, have you?  
ACE: What if I had?  
DOCTOR: Naturally you wouldn't do anything so insanely dangerous as to carry
it around with you, would you?  
ACE: Of course not. I'm a good girl. I do what I'm told.  
DOCTOR: Excellent. Blow up that vehicle.  
(Ace grins, and picks up her rucksack.)

**[Outside the Crypt]**

LEADER: Destroy them. Destroy them!  
CYBERMAN: We cannot sustain these losses, Leader. We must withdraw.  
LEADER: No. We must hold the statue and retrieve the arrow from them.  
CYBERMAN: If we are overcome, the entire strategy fails. The Cyber race will
cease to exist.  
LEADER: Your logic is correct. Their supply of gold is limited. Retreat.

**[Crypt]**

PEINFORTE: Of course. Help me, Richard. Tis in my tomb. Help me!

**[Outside the spacecraft]**

(The Doctor emerges from the hedgerow.)  
DOCTOR: Hello, I'm the Doctor! I believe you want to kill me.  
(The Doctor runs and the men follow. Ace runs to the spacecraft, throws the
rucksack inside then runs back to the hedgerow. KaBOOM! Karl and De Flores see
the fireball and drive towards it. Ace rejoins the Doctor as the men go to the
Cybermen.)

**[Outside the Crypt]**

LEADER: Betrayal. Kill them.  
ACE: They killed them, just cos I blew up the ship.  
DOCTOR: They were dead already. The Cybermen had transformed them. They were
no longer human beings.  
ACE: Is that why the Cybermen saved my life, so they could do that to me too?  
DOCTOR: Probably. They were like people themselves before they turned
themselves into Cybermen. Quite a lot of human beings are trying to follow
their example.

**[Crypt]**

(Richard has opened the top of the sarcophagus.)  
RICHARD: My lady, where are your bones?  
PEINFORTE: What matter?

**[Windsor Great Park]**

DOCTOR: Are we still jamming them?  
ACE: Tape's still running.  
DOCTOR: Good. Let's see who's listening to it.  
(He turns up the volume.)  
DOCTOR: Ah, sweet.

**[Clearing]**

(Karl and De Flores meet the Cybermen in a clearing.)  
DE FLORES: We want to talk to you. I don't know if you're familiar with
Wagner's Ring das Nibelungen. Now we, we are the supermen, but you, you are
the giants. They are wonderful creatures.  
LEADER: Of course, but why should we form an alliance with you?  
DE FLORES: We had a leader once. He predicted your coming. Now together we
shall fulfil his vision and reign over this world.  
LEADER: Together? The Cyber race requires no help from humans.  
KARL: But a woman who is almost less that human now holds the statue.  
DE FLORES: And she's armed with the most primitive toys.  
LEADER: You insult us.  
DE FLORES: Of course not. Whatever your unfortunate vulnerability doesn't
affect us. We can remove her for you.  
LEADER: We accept. Destroy the woman and her servant, and we will divide the
planet into your slave groups and ours.  
DE FLORES: Good.  
LEADER: But remember, betrayal will be fatal. We are invincible to your
weapons.  
DE FLORES: Come with me.  
(De Flores and Karl leave.)  
LEADER: Once they have the arrow and the statue, destroy them.

**[Windsor Great Park]**

(The hologram above the tape deck is empty.)  
DOCTOR: Anything there?  
ACE: Why am I doing this?  
DOCTOR: That handful back there aren't the only Cybermen in the universe.
We've got to find out where the others are.  
ACE: Look, this is where the signal's being received, right?  
DOCTOR: Right.  
ACE: But according to the scanner there's nothing there.  
DOCTOR: Then the scanner's wrong. That lot were only the advance party. Out
there somewhere's the entire Cyberforce, and they want the Nemesis more than
anything else in space.  
ACE: How can you be so sure?  
DOCTOR: Because it's 1988.  
ACE: Huh. That makes sense.  
DOCTOR: Listen, Ace. The Nemesis generates destruction. It affects everything
around it. I launched it into space, but unfortunately with an orbit that
brings it back to Earth every twenty five years. Take the twentieth century.
It appeared in 1913.  
ACE: The eve of the First World War.  
DOCTOR: Twenty five years later?  
ACE: 1938.  
DOCTOR: Hitler annexes Austria.  
ACE: 1963?  
DOCTOR: Kennedy assassinated.  
ACE: 1988.  
DOCTOR: Check the scanner again.  
(Elsewhere - )  
DE FLORES: Unfortunately, Wagner must be rewritten. The supermen must control
the giants. Only two illiterates stand between ourselves and the Fuhrer's
dream. Come.

**[Crypt]**

(The statue is uncovered in the sarcophagus.)  
PEINFORTE: How perfect you are. Immaculate beauty carved in absolute evil.  
RICHARD: But your bones, my lady? They should be buried  
PEINFORTE: What matter? They are dead, but I live, and soon I shall have the
bow and my Nemesis shall be complete.  
(A gunshot makes Richard duck.)  
PEINFORTE: We are attacked! Quickly, arrows.  
RICHARD: We have but one left, my lady. I doubt that our arrows can stop these
weapons anyway.  
PEINFORTE: Nonsense. Make it count. They killed the silver creatures.  
(More shots hit the stonework.)  
RICHARD: See, lady, we have no chance!  
PEINFORTE: Nonsense. No man shall take the Nemesis. Her might is mine!  
(Richard fires the last poisoned arrow.)  
PEINFORTE: Not for nothing did I design my own tomb. Death is but a door.  
(She presses a carving and a door opens in the wall.)  
PEINFORTE: I always knew I'd cheat it. Here, help me with the statue.  
RICHARD: We can't lift it, my lady. We must fly!  
KARL: Put up your hands.  
PEINFORTE: Never!  
RICHARD: You want the statue, master? Here, take it. Take it.  
PEINFORTE: No!  
(Richard snatches the silver arrow from Lady Peinforte.)  
RICHARD: Give her the arrow. See!  
(Richard throws the arrow into the sarcophagus.)  
RICHARD: Forgive me, my lady.  
PEINFORTE: Unhand me now!  
(Richard drags Lady Peinforte out through the new door. Karl fires and
misses.)  
PEINFORTE [OC]: No!  
DE FLORES: No matter, Karl, no matter. They are of no importance. We have the
statue, the arrow, and the bow.  
(The Nemesis's hand reaches for the arrow.)  
KARL: And the Cybermen?  
DE FLORES: Gold overcomes them. We have no such weakness. See how it prepares
for life. Your first task must be to take control of the extraterrestrials.  
(The Cyber Leader enters behind them.)  
LEADER: Unfortunately, that will not be possible.  
DE FLORES: Keep away. I possess the entire statue of Nemesis. All power is
mine. The life and death of everything in existence is in my hands.  
LEADER: Then where is the bow?  
(De Flores opens the case and discovered that it is empty.)

**[Windsor Great Park]**

(Ace is still staring at the scanner. The Doctor spots a lizard amongst the
foliage.)  
DOCTOR: Of course. It's so simple. They're shrouded.  
ACE: You what?  
DOCTOR: Shrouded. They don't show up. But we must try and force them into
revealing themselves. Treble. Bass. Please let me be right. Is anyone
listening? Balance.  
(The scanner fills with the Cyber fleet.)  
ACE: What are they?  
DOCTOR: Cyber warships. Thousands of them. They were invisible.

__**Part Three**__

**[Windsor Great Park]**

(The Doctor turns off the scanner.)  
ACE: What can we do?  
DOCTOR: I think our best move is to go to the crypt, unarmed, with the bow.  
ACE: Professor, are you losing your marbles?  
(The Doctor takes a handful of marbles from his pocket and pours them into
Ace's hands.)  
DOCTOR: We've got to get the bow into the statue's hands in order to activate
the validium.  
ACE: Is this the only way?  
DOCTOR: I believe in the direct approach. You can always go back to the
Tardis.  
ACE: Are we going or what?

**[Crypt]**

(De Flores tips some gold dust into his palm then turns around to face the
Cybermen.)  
DE FLORES: Surely we, er, we can negotiate this er, this misunderstanding?  
LEADER: Our understanding is perfect. You thought you had all three components
of the statue, and naturally wished to destroy us.  
KARL: You are completely mistaken.  
LEADER: Silence.  
CYBERMAN: Validium activity indicates proximity of the bow, Leader.  
LEADER: Excellent. Kill them.  
(De Flores throws the gold dust at the Leader, but is aiming at its head, not
chest unit. It staggers back briefly as De Flores and Karl walk out.)

**[Outside the Crypt]**

(A Cyberman follows them.)  
KARL: Herr De Flores.  
DE FLORES: You fool, they're going to kill us.  
KARL: Your day is over.  
DE FLORES: You betray me? Have I taught you nothing?  
KARL: Everything. Which is why we now part company. I'm afraid you failed to
understand history in addition to Wagner.  
DE FLORES: I?  
KARL: Supermen are all very well, but the giants are the master race.  
(The Cyber Leader comes outside.)  
KARL: Here he is. Now make me one of you.  
LEADER: You show potential. Very well. Have them programmed at once.  
(Two Cybermen take Karl and De Flores back inside the tower.)  
LEADER: We must complete the statue immediately. Locate the bow. Destroy the
Doctor and his young friend.  
(Richard leads the Lady Peinforte up some steps from below the base of the
tower.)  
RICHARD: How is it with you, my lady?  
PEINFORTE: I understand not.  
RICHARD: What's to understand?  
PEINFORTE: Always I have treated you badly. I have done you no service, shown
you no kindness, and yet you risk your life to save me. Why so?  
RICHARD: Should I not?  
PEINFORTE: I do not live in the world of what should. But you're a good man,
Richard, and I am evil.  
RICHARD: My lady, we have no more weapons.  
PEINFORTE: No, you're wrong. I have one more yet that will not fail. My
knowledge. I will have the statue of Nemesis.

**[Windsor Great Park]**

ACE: Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Ace?  
ACE: Look, let's be honest, right? I've never really bottled out of anything
before, have I, but I'm really, really scared, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Oh, Ace. I'm sorry. Forgive me. Why don't you go back to the Tardis?
You'll be safe there, whatever happens.  
ACE: No chance, Doctor. No chance.

**[Crypt]**

(De Flores and Karl have been fitted with headphones.)  
CYBERMAN: The Cyberfleet are still not receiving our transmission, Leader.  
LEADER: Is there any pattern to the jamming signal?  
(The Cyberman turns on the monitor channel, and jazz is heard.)  
CYBERMAN: It is meaningless.  
(As the Doctor and Ace run towards the tower, the tape stops. The
communications unit light comes on.)  
CYBERMAN: Communication channels to the Cyberfleet are clear again, Leader.  
LEADER: Excellent. Their arrival is imminent.  
DE FLORES: You fool. Without the bow the statue's power is nothing.  
LEADER: We will shortly obtain the bow.  
DE FLORES: From the Doctor? Don't delude yourself. He is no common adversary.
Do you think he'll simply walk in here and hand it over?  
DOCTOR: Good afternoon.  
LEADER: Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Yes, here we are. I'm sorry we couldn't have been here earlier, but we
were held up on the way. I don't believe you've met my friend Ace.  
LEADER: Give me the bow.  
DOCTOR: Cyberleader moves pawn to discover check.  
ACE: Ace replies by neatly castling with the bow.  
LEADER: Give me the bow.  
DOCTOR: Doctor en passant behind Cyberleader.  
LEADER: Give me the bow!  
(The Doctor grabs the bow with his umbrella.)  
DOCTOR: Doctor supports combination gambit.  
LEADER: Take the bow from him.  
DOCTOR: Middle game element with Cybermen.  
(The Doctor pirouettes to the sarcophagus, putting his hat over a Cyberman's
gun.)  
LEADER: Kill him!  
DOCTOR: End game. Illegal move, but checkmate!  
(The Doctor gives the bow to Nemesis to activate it, then takes it back.)  
DOCTOR: That seems to be in order.  
(The Doctor takes back his hat.)  
DOCTOR: Run!

**[Outside the Crypt]**

DOCTOR: The Tardis.  
ACE: No statue?  
DOCTOR: Now it's awake, it'll follow the bow.  
(The glowing silver statue stands up and there are small explosions around
her. A piercing scream splits the air as fire blows out of the windows of the
tower.)

**[Windsor Great Park]**

(Lady Peinforte hears it.)  
PEINFORTE: Fear not, Richard. It is the Nemesis come alive.  
RICHARD: Alive?  
PEINFORTE: Why, yes. Which means it is complete, and now it shall be mine.  
(The Tardis dematerialises.)  
PEINFORTE: All power, all power past, present and future, shall be mine. Why,
I shall be mistress of all of that is, all that shall be, all that ever was.
Yes, all! All!  
RICHARD: My lady, let us find some shelter.  
PEINFORTE: How dare you! I shall lead and you follow!

**[Lady Peinforte's home]**

(The Doctor is staring at the chess board in 1638 while Ace rolls up the
mathematicians papers.)  
ACE: Hey, why are we here? What's going on, Professor?  
DOCTOR: Unfinished business. We don't want those to fall into the wrong hands,
just yet.  
ACE: How's the game going?  
DOCTOR: Black's losing.  
ACE: What happens to these calculations?  
DOCTOR: Bishop takes rook. Someone steals them.  
ACE: The same person who steals the bow? I mean, the same person who steals it
in 1788?  
DOCTOR: How should I know, Ace? Questions, questions. Queen takes bishop.  
ACE: Who brought validium to Earth in the first place?  
DOCTOR: But pawn takes queen.  
ACE: What's really going on, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Checkmate. Black wins. Time to go. Take those gold coins. We may need
them.

**[Road]**

(Lady Peinforte and Richard see a hitchhiker get a lift in a car.)  
PEINFORTE: We needs must walk, Richard. We have no carriage.  
RICHARD: We can avail ourselves of one of these steeds, my lady. I see the
method. Sit you here and rest awhile.  
(Lady Peinforte settles herself on a stone seat built into the estate wall.
Richard goes to the side of the road and sticks his thumb out. A car drives
straight past him, then a second. Lady Peinforte sings to herself as she
waits.)

**[Crypt]**

LEADER: The Doctor must not lead the statue back to the rocket sleds. We will
stop him.

**[Warehouse]**

(The Tardis materialises.)  
DOCTOR: Ah. Now, the statue should be here any moment now. Everything depends
on my final calculations. I can't get my figures wrong this time.  
ACE: It's okay, Professor. I promise not to interrupt you.  
DOCTOR: You are interrupting me.  
ACE: Sorry.  
DOCTOR: There's also another slight problem. The Cybermen could be here at any
moment.  
ACE: Don't worry, Doctor. I'll look after you.  
(Ace takes a catapult from her belt.)  
DOCTOR: Aim at the chest panel. And I trust you remember my strict
instructions never to cause any further explosions?  
ACE: I'm a better person as a result, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Good. We're ready for anything.  
(Ace goes to place the Nitro Nine flask.)

**[Road]**

PEINFORTE: All will be mine.  
(Richard is still failing to get a lift. Lady Peinforte gets up as a stretched
limousine approaches and holds up her hand.)

**[Limousine]**

(The rich American lady in the back is played by  Dolores Gray.)  
REMINGTON: Er, Cyril, honey, pull the automobile over. There's some people
there who could use a lift.  
(The car stops and the window winds down.)  
REMINGTON: Where are you folks headed?  
RICHARD: To Windsor, and it please you, ma'am.  
REMINGTON: It surely does, honey. Jump right in.

**[Crypt]**

(Karl has disposed of his headphones and the Cybermen.)  
KARL: Herr De Flores, your day is over.  
(He takes De Flores's headphones off.)  
DE FLORES: (laughs) You betray me. Have I taught you nothing.  
KARL: We completely deceived them, Herr De Flores.  
DE FLORES: Even I thought for a moment we were finished. I am not afraid of
death, only of failing in my duty.

**[Warehouse]**

(The Doctor climbs into the rocket sled with the bow. The statue arrives and
floats in beside him.)  
DOCTOR: Now, ah yes, the bow. The bow. The bow is essential. You shall have
the bow.  
(The Nemesis takes the bow.)

**[Limousine]**

REMINGTON: You must be parched from standing in the sun. May I offer you a
little refreshment?  
RICHARD: Thank you, no, madam.  
REMINGTON: Oh. Are you folks students?  
RICHARD: Alas, I am but a servant, and cannot read or write.  
REMINGTON: Oh.  
RICHARD: My mistress is of noble birth, and has some Latin and a little Greek.  
REMINGTON: Well, you must be on vacation at this time.  
RICHARD: Go you far, ma'am?  
REMINGTON: Far? Oh, I just came over from London.  
RICHARD: Two days ride.  
REMINGTON: Well, no, actually the traffic was pretty reasonable. I left about,
let's see, forty minutes ago.  
RICHARD: Forty minutes?  
REMINGTON: Folks from the south are never in a hurry. As a matter of fact, I'm
here on a visit, checking out my roots.  
RICHARD: Tis wise with crops this time of year, ma'am.  
REMINGTON: Oh.

**[Warehouse]**

(While the Doctor programmes the rocket sled, Ace walks up to look at the
statue.)  
NEMESIS: I am beautiful, am I not?  
ACE: Yes. You're very beautiful.  
NEMESIS: It is only my present form. I have had others which would horrify
you. I shall have those again. You are surprised I speak?  
ACE: I know you're living metal.  
NEMESIS: I am whatever I am made to be. This time Lady Peinforte called me
Nemesis, so I am retribution.  
ACE: Catch you later.

**[Limousine]**

REMINGTON: Well, my family came from around here. I traced them all the way
back to the sixteen hundreds.  
PEINFORTE: All things will soon be mine.  
REMINGTON: I guess they will, honey.  
PEINFORTE: Time past, present and future. Power invincible.

**[Warehouse]**

(Ace runs to the doorway and a Cyberman enters, firing. She runs back and up
the steps to a landing outside an office, gets out her catapult and sends a
gold coin straight into its chest unit. The other Cybermen enter and see the
body.)  
LEADER: Destroy the human female. Find and destroy her!

**[Limousine]**

PEINFORTE: The secret of the heavens.  
REMINGTON: Virginia is heaven, if you ask me. My family owns a little land
there. They used to own a little land around here, too. The Remingtons of
Remington Grange.  
PEINFORTE: I know them. Thieves and swindlers all.  
REMINGTON: You study history?  
PEINFORTE: Dorothea Remington did bribe away my cook.  
REMINGTON: Oh. Now, let me see. Yes, there was a Dorothea. She died in sixteen  
PEINFORTE: Twenty one. Twas a slow poison.  
REMINGTON: This is unbelievable.  
PEINFORTE: Many found it so.  
REMINGTON: Here I am, driving around, and I pick up someone who's researched
my family tree.  
PEINFORTE: We ride to destiny.  
REMINGTON: We surely do, honey. We surely do.

**[Warehouse]**

(Ace takes out another Cyberman on the upper floor then leads another on a
chase while the Doctor continues his programming. Another meets its end on a
small spiral stone staircase, but the second forces her to move up the steps,
leaving the bag of coins behind.  
(The Nemesis lies down in the rocket sled.)  
DOCTOR: And now, we'll set the rockets for the correct projection, and then
you will be on course for the Cyberfleet.  
(Ace makes her way along a catwalk up in the roof space. She sees the Tardis
down below her, then a Cyberman pops up in front of her and holds up its
hands. The Cyberleader is on the adjoining catwalk.)  
ACE: Why? You're going to kill me anyway.  
LEADER: We detect only one more piece of gold.  
ACE: Correct. So who'll be next, and who'll be lucky?  
(A third Cyberman boxes her in from the rear.)  
LEADER: Kill her.  
(Ace fires her catapult at the Cyberleader on the other catwalk, then ducks to
let the two Cybermen in front and behind kill each other.  
The Doctor is outside the rocket sled.)  
DOCTOR: The rockets are now locked in to a destination. Now, let's see how the
Cyberfleet is progressing.  
(He turns on the tape deck scanner.)  
DOCTOR: Right on course.  
NEMESIS: And I'm to destroy the entire Cyberfleet?  
DOCTOR: Forever.  
NEMESIS: And then?  
DOCTOR: Reform.  
NEMESIS: You might need me in the future, then?  
DOCTOR: I hope not.  
NEMESIS: That is what you said before.  
DOCTOR: Enough.  
NEMESIS: And after this, will I have my freedom?  
DOCTOR: Not yet.  
NEMESIS: When?  
DOCTOR: I told you when.  
(The Doctor takes the bow from Nemesis.)  
DOCTOR: Things are still imperfect.  
(Two Cybermen approach the Doctor and Ace runs in. They turn, guns raised.)  
DOCTOR: Stop! Harm her in the slightest, and I will destroy this bow!  
CYBERMAN: Give us the bow, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: No.  
CYBERMAN: We shall simply take it and kill you both.  
DOCTOR: Ah.  
CYBERMAN: In any case, your threat was meaningless. How could you have
destroyed the bow?  
DOCTOR: Well, actually, I would have arranged to have the bow neatly placed in
front of the rocket sled. Then I would have arranged the rockets to test fire
at a pre-arranged time. By the way, Ace, what is the time?  
ACE: Well, it's almost  
(The Doctor hooks her arm with his umbrella and pulls back behind the rocket
motors just before they burst into life, incinerating the Cyberman. The Doctor
covers Ace's eyes. Up on the catwalk, the Cyberman removes the bent gold coin
from its chest unit.)  
ACE: Is that it, Doctor? Oh no, not you again.  
(It is De Flores and Karl.)  
DE FLORES: The bow.  
(Karl picks it up and hands it to De Flores.)  
DE FLORES: We have both succeeded in deceiving the Cybermen.  
KARL: They made the mistake of assuming all human beings to be weak,
corruptible. We, however, are loyal to the death.  
(De Flores takes the bow to Nemesis.)  
DE FLORES: The long journey is over. You will be worshipped forever. Doesn't
she speak?  
DOCTOR: Not to the likes of you.  
DE FLORES: She will. Well, Doctor, we must part. And thank you for removing
the Cybermen. Now the Nemesis is finally mine.  
(The Cyberleader shoots De Flores and Karl.)  
ACE: I'm sorry, Doctor. I thought I'd got him.  
LEADER: Give me the bow, or I will kill her.  
PEINFORTE: All things, all power. Time, space, the world.  
LEADER: She is mad.  
RICHARD: Speak not of my lady so.  
PEINFORTE: See, I am here.  
ACE: What do you want?  
PEINFORTE: My Nemesis.  
ACE: You're too late. The Doctor's got it.  
PEINFORTE: It is incomplete until it holds the bow. That may be given over to
anyone. It will now be given to me.  
LEADER: No! To us.  
PEINFORTE: You are nothing. Only the Doctor matters, and he is but a pawn in
the game of my making.  
ACE: Listen, you old bag.  
RICHARD: Silence!  
ACE: The Doctor's not just going to give you the bow. Tell her, Doctor. Tell
her.  
PEINFORTE: Doctor who? Have you never wondered where he came from, who he is?  
ACE: Nobody knows who the Doctor is.  
PEINFORTE: Except me.  
ACE: How?  
PEINFORTE: The statue told me.  
ACE: All right, so what does it matter? He's a Time Lord, I know that.  
PEINFORTE: Well, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: If I give you the bow  
PEINFORTE: Your power becomes mine, but your secrets remain your own.  
DOCTOR: It's all over, Ace. My battle, all my battles, I've lost. I can only
surrender.  
PEINFORTE: Yes.  
DOCTOR: But not to you. The Cybermen will have the Nemesis.  
(The Doctor gives the bow to the Cyberleader.)  
LEADER: This is most rational, Doctor.  
PEINFORTE: But I know your secrets.  
DOCTOR: Very well, tell them.  
PEINFORTE: I shall tell them of Gallifrey, tell them of the old time, the time
of chaos.  
DOCTOR: Be my guest.  
PEINFORTE: Your secrets  
LEADER: The secrets of the Time Lords mean nothing to us.  
DOCTOR: Exactly. Thank you for coming to the twentieth century and giving me
assistance. Thank you for bringing the arrow. You may go now.  
PEINFORTE: What?  
DOCTOR: You had the right game, but the wrong pawn. Check.  
LEADER: Enough, Doctor. Cancel the statue's destructive capability.  
(The Doctor takes back the bow.)  
DOCTOR: Thank you.  
(And gives it back to Nemesis.)  
DOCTOR: Do you understand the Cyberleader's instructions?  
NEMESIS: Perfectly.  
ACE: Please don't surrender, Doctor.  
LEADER: Prepare it for launching to liaise with our fleet. You have the
position from this device.  
(The Cyberleader holds up the tape.)  
LEADER: A new and final era begins, Doctor. Imagination, thought, freedom,
pleasure, all will end.  
(It crushes the jazz tape and throws it away.)  
LEADER: The Earth will be transformed into our base planet, the new Mondas.
Before I kill you all, you may watch the arrival of our fleet. Launch the
Nemesis.  
ACE: Let them kill me, Doctor. Don't surrender.  
DOCTOR: Stand back. She's ready for launching.  
(Lady Peinforte screams, grabs the bow and throws herself on top of the
Nemesis. It writhes as it absorbs her, then the rocket sled blasts out of the
warehouse entrance and up into the sky. Mrs Remington watches it go.)  
ACE: Nice rocket technology, Doctor.  
LEADER: We will watch its progress.  
DOCTOR: Certainly.  
(The Doctor turns on the tape deck scanner. The Nemesis flies into the heart
of the Cyberfleet, which is stationed by the moon, and detonates.)  
LEADER: This is impossible. You gave my instructions to the statue.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I gave your instructions to the Nemesis, and it understood them.
It understood them, and disobeyed them, and destroyed the Cyberfleet.  
LEADER: Then you will join them.  
DOCTOR: It's worth it.  
(Richard sees his gold tipped arrow still stuck in the Tardis' door. He grabs
it, runs over and thrusts it into the Cyberleader's chest. It dies with a lot
of noise.)  
DOCTOR: That seems to be that. Thank you.  
RICHARD: It was nothing, Doctor. I wish I could have saved my lady, too, but
she was one with your statue. How shall I live now, stranded, a stranger in
this time?  
DOCTOR: I know how you feel. However  
ACE: He'll give you a lift.  
DOCTOR: Back to 1638?  
RICHARD: It's possible?  
DOCTOR: Anything's possible.

**[Lady Peinforte's home]**

(The Doctor and Ace are playing chess in the garden.)  
ACE: So you sent the Nemesis off into space to draw the Cybermen so you could
finish them off.  
DOCTOR: I suppose I did. How clever of me.  
ACE: Just like you nailed the Daleks.  
DOCTOR: As I said, Ace. Unfinished business.  
(The Doctor tips over his king.)  
ACE: There's still one question you haven't answered.  
(Richard and a lady lute player approach.)  
RICHARD: We have none of this jazz whereof you speak, Doctor, but I think you
will like this.  
(Richard plays the flute while his companion plays the lute.)  
ACE: Professor? Doctor? Who are you?  
(The Doctor puts his finger to his lips.)  
  
---  
  
<Back to the episode listing

Doctor Who and related marks are trademarks of BBC . Copyright © 1963,
Present. The web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment
purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

