

**The Android Invasion**  
  
Original Airdate: 22 Nov, 1975  

__**Part One**__

**[Woodland]**

(A Corporal is walking through the undergrowth of Tubney Wood as if in a
trance. He stares blankly ahead, and his right arm twitches from time to time.
After he has passed, the Tardis materialises in a small clearing by a clump of
purple loose-strife and some oak saplings. The Doctor steps out and takes a
drink from a small bottle.)  
SARAH [OC]: Well, come on, make your mind up. Has the Tardis brought us home
or not?  
DOCTOR: Possibly.  
(Sarah comes out of the Tardis and shuts the door.)  
SARAH: What do you mean, possibly.  
DOCTOR: Well, the coordinates were set for your time, but the linear
calculator, well. Ginger pop?  
SARAH: Can't stand the stuff, thanks all the same. So we could be anytime,
anywhere?  
DOCTOR: I really must get the Tardis seen to. She's way overdue her five
hundred year service.  
SARAH: Well, at least we're on Earth. I mean, just taste that air. I love that
fresh smell just after a rain shower.  
DOCTOR: Yes, it does have that peculiar earthy smell. Which is odd when you
look at the ground.  
SARAH: Hmm?  
DOCTOR: It's bone dry. Can't have been any rain here for more than a week.  
(The Doctor takes a small device out of his pocket. It beeps.)  
DOCTOR: Now I wonder what could be causing that.  
SARAH: What?  
DOCTOR: Some enormous release of energy.  
SARAH: We are on Earth, aren't we?  
DOCTOR: Well, unless someone's started exporting acorns. Oak trees don't grow
anywhere else in the Galaxy.  
SARAH: Bet we're miles away from UNIT HQ though. So, what are we going to do?  
(The Doctor calls off the points of the compass.)  
DOCTOR: Eenie, meenie, minie, mo?  
(They head off in the same direction as the soldier.)  
DOCTOR: Watch the bramble.  
SARAH: Ow.  
DOCTOR: I told you to watch the bramble.  
SARAH: Listen, what's so special about eenie meenie minie mo?  
DOCTOR: Nothing. It could just as easily have be fum fo fee fi.  
SARAH: Fee fi fo fum.  
(The Doctor and Sarah walk out of sight, and the twitching soldier reappears,
walking off at ninety degrees to their direction. Later - )  
SARAH: Hang on. I thought I saw someone.  
(Four figures in white protective suits and helmets come out of the trees
ahead.)  
DOCTOR: Let's hope they're not strangers here themselves. Hello there!  
SARAH: No. Wait, Doctor. I don't like the look of them.  
DOCTOR: What? Please excuse me. Could you be very kind and tell me where we
are?  
(The figures raise their right arms and point at the Doctor. The fingers are
guns, and they work. Sarah and the Doctor run for cover in the trees. The
figures follow.)  
DOCTOR: I thought it was odd. Didn't you think it was odd? I remember once at
the battle of Malplaquet, I said to the Duke of Marlborough  
SARAH: Oh, come on, Doctor! Let's get out of here! Argh!  
(Sarah disappears into a growth of bracken and ends up rolling down a slope
towards a steep cliff. She manages to grab on to the edge.)  
DOCTOR: Sarah! Don't look down!  
(The Doctor gets to her and pulls her back to safety.)  
SARAH: Thanks.  
DOCTOR: My pleasure. Couldn't leave you hanging around in a place like this.  
(They see the twitching soldier moving rapidly towards the cliff edge.)  
DOCTOR: Stop, man. Stop!  
SARAH: No! No!  
(The soldier goes flying over the edge. The Doctor and Sarah find a safe route
down and go to check on him.)

**[Quarry]**

DOCTOR: He must have died instantly.  
(Sarah picks up his beret badge.)  
SARAH: Look. He's from UNIT.  
(The Doctor checks his wallet.)  
DOCTOR: Look at these.  
(The Doctor gives Sarah a handful of coins.)  
SARAH: They're all new.  
DOCTOR: Freshly minted. No scratches, tarnish.  
SARAH: And all dated the same year.  
DOCTOR: What are the odds against finding a pocket full of coins all dated the
same?  
SARAH: I don't understand it.  
DOCTOR: No. Nor do I, yet.  
(The Doctor has spotted a strange object nearby. Longer than a man, black,
egg-shaped, marked into quarters.)  
SARAH: Oh, come on, Doctor. It's just a load of old junk.  
DOCTOR: No, no, shush, wait, wait. I've seen something like this before. My
memory's getting terrible. You know, three hundred years ago I'd have
recognised this like a shot.  
(Weapons fire. The Doctor falls.)  
SARAH: Doctor!  
DOCTOR: Keep down!  
(They take cover behind the artefact. The Doctor looks round the end to see
two of the figures. Another shot.)  
DOCTOR: Something seems to have annoyed them again. Come on.  
(They run off and up a slope to a cornfield, then along the margins as the
figures try to pursue, but stop at the field and turn back.)

**[Village]**

(The Doctor and Sarah enter a rural village, played by East Hagbourne.)  
DOCTOR: Well, well. Well, well.  
SARAH: Devesham.  
DOCTOR: Hmm?  
(The place is deserted.)  
SARAH: Doctor, we're at Devesham.  
DOCTOR: Do you know it?  
SARAH: I came here on a story about two years ago.  
DOCTOR: It's a bit quiet.  
SARAH: Yes.  
(The Doctor goes up the steps of the stone cross in the middle of the roads.)  
DOCTOR: Anyone about? Anyone?  
(The half-timbered houses are silent.)  
DOCTOR: No one about. Let's try the pub.

**[Fleur de Lys]**

(It is open, but empty. There are two nearly full pint jugs on the bar.
Another jug and a glass of wine on a table, more on another.)  
DOCTOR: Hello? Innkeeper?  
SARAH: Hello? Anyone about?  
DOCTOR: What's this pub called?  
SARAH: Er, Fleur de Lys, wasn't it?  
DOCTOR: What?  
SARAH: Fleur de Lys.  
DOCTOR: Marie Celeste, more like it.  
SARAH: It's weird. A whole village full of people can't just disappear.  
(The Doctor opens the till.)  
DOCTOR: Here it is again.  
SARAH: What?  
DOCTOR: Freshly minted money, all the same year. Sarah?  
SARAH: Hmm?  
DOCTOR: What was that story you came here on?  
SARAH: There was a bit of a brouhaha at the Space Defence Station. It's about
a mile from here.  
DOCTOR: Is it. If we've landed in a prohibited area, then those people who
shot at us were possibly guards.  
SARAH: Trespassers are prosecuted in England, not killed. Anyway, they weren't
dressed like guards.  
DOCTOR: Protective clothing? Some kind of radioactivity? Remember, I detected
an energy source. The soldier who went over the cliff was possibly affected by
it.  
SARAH: Radiation sickness?  
DOCTOR: Something like that.  
SARAH: And this place, the village?  
DOCTOR: Evacuated.  
SARAH: Then it must've been done in a hurry.  
DOCTOR: If some dangerous substance leaked, it would be an emergency.  
SARAH: That's great. And we've been walking around in the middle of it like a
couple of 'narnas.  
DOCTOR: It's only a speculation.  
SARAH: It's a nasty one. What about the money?  
DOCTOR: Contamination precaution. Money changes hands. In a place like this,
it might be necessary to bring in clean currency every few months.  
(Sarah looks out of the window.)  
SARAH: Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Huh?  
SARAH: The village isn't deserted anymore.  
(The four figures are walking down the road from the church, escorting a
soldier.)  
SARAH: No, it can't be. It can't be!  
DOCTOR: That's impossible.  
(As they pass the pub, it is clearly the Lance Corporal, no longer twitching
or dead.)  
SARAH: He was dead. We saw him.  
(Sarah steps back and knocks into a table. The empty glasses fall over and one
smashes on the floor. Outside, the group stops, then approaches the front
door.)  
SARAH: They heard me.  
DOCTOR: Wait.  
(A pick-up van drives up with a group of villagers sitting in the back. Young,
old, the vicar in his panama hat. They stand when the engine is turned off. A
white-suited figure gets out of the cab and unfastens the side. The people
step down and go on their way, blank and staring.)  
SARAH: (sotto) The man in the tweed jacket, that's Mister Morgan, the
landlord.  
DOCTOR: (sotto) Come on.  
(They go through an internal door and shut it behind them. Morgan leads the
soldier and several people into the pub. The Doctor and Sarah open the door
slightly and watch as they resume their places and their drinks, still as
statues. Then the clock chimes and they all come to life.)

**[Back room]**

DOCTOR: Extraordinary.  
SARAH: What's the matter with them?  
DOCTOR: I haven't the faintest idea, but I intend to find out.  
SARAH: How?  
DOCTOR: Space Defence Station. I could contact UNIT from there. You stay here
and keep an eye on things.  
SARAH: Eh?  
DOCTOR: You'll be all right.  
SARAH: I've heard that before.  
DOCTOR: Can you find your way back to the Tardis?  
SARAH: Of course I can.  
(The Doctor gives her the Tardis key.)  
DOCTOR: Right. If anything goes wrong, meet me there.  
SARAH: And what if  
(The Doctor has already left.)

**[Fleur de Lys]**

(The previously dead soldier notices the door knob turning, and pulls it open
suddenly. Sarah nearly falls into the bar. Everyone stares at her.)  
SARAH: Afternoon. Well, just about, anyway. Hallo. Mister Morgan, isn't it?
You remember me, don't you? Sarah Jane Smith? I came here on a story. I stayed
here about two years ago.  
(Silence and blank stares.)  
SARAH: Well, somebody say something.  
ADAMS: Who sent you?  
SARAH: What do you mean, who sent me?  
ADAMS: How did you get here?  
SARAH: I walked. Look, perhaps you'd like  
ADAMS: What are you doing here?  
SARAH: Do you allow all your customers to be grilled like this?  
ADAMS: We don't have strangers here.  
SARAH: Oh, come on, that's ridiculous.  
MORGAN: Wait. She may be part of the test.  
SARAH: Test? What test?  
ADAMS: She doesn't know.  
SARAH: What don't I know? Look, what's going on here?  
MORGAN: I think you'd better go, Miss.  
SARAH: Why?  
MORGAN: It might be best.  
SARAH: Look, if there's some sort of trouble, perhaps I could help. I see.
Well, I intend to find out, anyway.  
(Sarah backs towards the door. The soldier steps towards her.)  
SARAH: And I'm sure you shouldn't be drinking so soon after breaking your
neck.  
(Sarah leaves very quickly. The pick up is still outside with the figure
facing forward. It's visor is open. She hides behind the vehicle and the
figure turns round. Instead of a face, it has circuitry. Sarah runs back
towards the woods and it watches her go.)

**[Space Defence Station reception]**

(A modern concrete building - Nuclear Research Establishment I think - with a
giant radio telescope added and no perimeter security. The Doctor strolls
through the paved courtyard and through the main sliding doors. He finds a
blank armed soldier in the reception area.)  
DOCTOR: Can you tell me where I can find the CO? The Commanding Officer?  
(No reply.)  
DOCTOR: I'll tell you what. I won't bother you.  
(The Doctor goes down a corridor and looks in the first room he comes through.
The soldier does not follow so he carries on out of our sight. Then the
soldier slowly turns to look.)

**[Woodland]**

(Sarah returns to the Tardis and is just putting the key in the lock when she
notices the artefact from the quarry sitting nearby. She leaves the key in the
lock and goes to investigate. The Tardis starts up.)  
SARAH: Doctor! Don't go! I'm still here!  
(The Tardis dematerialises.)  
SARAH: Don't leave me.  
(The artefact begins to open.)  
SARAH: Can't have gone.  
(A hand from the artefact grabs her leg. Sarah squeals and runs away a few
steps, then turns to a shiny-looking man is lying inside it. She goes back and
kneels next to him.)  
SARAH: Can I help you?  
(The man grabs her around the throat, but she gets free and runs back into the
woods.)

**[Crayford's office]**

(A man with a patch over his left eye is startled by the intercom. He runs
into his office to answer the permanently annoyed voice.)  
STYGGRON [OC]: Crayford! Crayford! Crayford, I say.  
CRAYFORD: Yes, Styggron.  
STYGGRON [OC]: I ordered all units to recharge stations. The order is not
being observed.  
CRAYFORD: In what way, Styggron?  
STYGGRON [OC]: We have detected movement within the complex. A unit may have
gone random. Check and report!  
CRAYFORD: Yes, Styggron. Immediately, Styggron.  
(Crayford goes out of his office, pauses and goes into the next room. The
Doctor comes through a fire door and along the hall. He stops at the room
Crayford has gone into then notices the name plate on Crayford's office.
Brigadier Lethbridge Stewart. He knocks and enters)

**[Crayford's office]**

DOCTOR: Alistair? Alistair?  
(The Doctor reads a note on the desk, then picks up an Ordnance Survey map and
starts to unfold it. Crayford enters through an interconnecting door with a
gun in his hand.)  
CRAYFORD: Keep your hands where I can see them.  
DOCTOR: Those are the first friendly words I've heard since I got here.  
CRAYFORD: Yes, I dare say. And just how did you get here, incidentally?  
DOCTOR: Oh, I dropped in. You know, I do from time to time.  
CRAYFORD: I can easily get the truth from you.  
DOCTOR: You're getting it.  
(Crayford snatches the map.)  
DOCTOR: Who are you?  
CRAYFORD: I'm asking the questions and I have the gun.  
DOCTOR: I just wondered. You're in someone else's office. It says Brigadier
Lethbridge Stewart on the door.  
CRAYFORD: You know the Brigadier?  
DOCTOR: Mmm. I'm his unpaid scientific advisor.  
CRAYFORD: Oh yes. Yes, I see. I see, you're the Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
CRAYFORD: Yes, I've heard of you.  
DOCTOR: Good. Who are you?  
CRAYFORD: I'm the Senior Defence astronaut, Guy Crayford.  
DOCTOR: Well, how do you do.  
CRAYFORD: Get your hands up, Doctor, thank you. You could be an impostor,
couldn't you.  
DOCTOR: Look, I've got a suggestion. My arms are beginning to ache. Why not
call Lethbridge Stewart and get him to identify me?  
CRAYFORD: Lethbridge Stewart is in Geneva. Colonel Faraday is in command.  
(Crayford presses a button the intercom.)  
DOCTOR: If you're calling the butler, I'm very partial to tea and muffins.  
CRAYFORD: You're going to have to stay in detention until your identity's been
verified.  
DOCTOR: Oh, please, no detention. Not detention. You see, I suffer from  
(The Doctor overturns the desk. Crayford shoots and misses as the Doctor
dashes into the hallway.)

**[Outside Crayford's office]**

(The soldier appears at the end of the hallway. The Doctor runs through the
fire door and climbs a ladder to a loft hatch.)  
CRAYFORD: Get after him, man!  
(The solder arrives just in time to see the loft hatch close.)

**[SDC roof]**

(With alarms whooping, and soldiers firing rifles from lower levels, the
Doctor runs along the parapet and jumps down onto a gravel area, where one
then two white-suited figures are pointing their fingers at him. Sarah sees
all this.)  
DOCTOR: Is that finger loaded?  
(The Doctor is taken away. After a moment, Sarah comes out of hiding and
follows.)

**[Outside SDC cell]**

(The Doctor is taken down a hallway with a telephone on the wall at the
entrance end, and put into a room with a grille on the door. A figure bolts it
from the outside then the pair leave. Sarah sneaks up.)  
SARAH: (sotto) Doctor? Doctor, can you hear me?  
DOCTOR [OC]: Sarah, what are you doing here?  
SARAH: Rescuing you, actually. For a change.  
DOCTOR [OC]: Thank you.  
(Sarah starts to unbolt the door. An intercom on the wall by the door swings
back to reveal that a small eye in a large brown face is watching her.)

__**Part Two**__

**[Outside SDC cell]**

(Nervous, Sarah looks up and the panel closes again.)  
DOCTOR [OC]: Get a move on.  
SARAH: It's stuck!  
(She frees the bottom bolt and the other two undo easily. The Doctor comes
out.)  
SARAH: Doctor, what did you do?  
DOCTOR: Ask me later. Come on.

**[Kraal ship]**

(The theme here is brown and round. We only get glimpses of the constantly
angry alien - a boot, a hand, a piece of tunic.)  
STYGGRON: Crayford?  
CRAYFORD [on monitor]: Yes, Styggron?  
STYGGRON: Crayford, a second random unit in the cell area. What has gone
wrong?  
CRAYFORD [on monitor]: A second?  
STYGGRON: These patterns were not programmed. Explain.  
CRAYFORD [on monitor]: Styggron, was this second unit a female?  
STYGGRON: Yes, one of the village section. Check the directives. A fault must
have developed.  
CRAYFORD [on monitor: It's not a fault, Styggron, it's a remarkable success.  
STYGGRON: A success?  
CRAYFORD [on monitor]: They are space travellers. The Doctor, as he is called,
is a humanoid, a scientist who advices on Earth Defence. His companion is
human.  
STYGGRON: I see. Then they are externals.  
CRAYFORD [on monitor]: They've arrived by error.  
STYGGRON: Perhaps by error, perhaps by design.  
CRAYFORD [on monitor]: Design?  
STYGGRON: If this Doctor advises on defence  
(An alarm sounds.)  
CRAYFORD [on monitor]: The cell block.  
STYGGRON: They must not escape, Crayford. They must not escape!

**[Outside SDC closet]**

(A group of soldiers run along a hallway, past a small red access door.)  
SARAH [OC]: Doctor, what on Earth did you do?  
DOCTOR [OC]: Do?  
SARAH [OC]: For them to lock you up? I mean, they seem to be taking you very
seriously.

**[SDC closet]**

DOCTOR: I didn't do anything. Just finding me on the premises was enough to
upset Crayford.  
SARAH: Crayford?  
DOCTOR: Yes, Guy Crayford. He said he was the senior astronaut.  
SARAH: But that's impossible. Guy Crayford was killed.  
DOCTOR: How?  
SARAH: That was the first test of the XK-5 space freighter. Crayford was out
in space, deep space, and then they lost him. The ship just vanished. They
thought he'd hit an asteroid.  
(More footsteps running past.)  
SARAH: Guy Crayford is dead, Doctor.

**[Crayford's office]**

CRAYFORD: There's no cause for alarm, Styggron. The station is being
thoroughly searched section by section. All exits are covered and the guards
have orders to shoot on sight.  
STYGGRON [OC]: Then countermand that order. They must be kept alive for
pattern analysis.  
CRAYFORD: But Styggron, we already have a complete pattern for the village and
Defence complex.  
STYGGRON [OC]: Do as I say. The Doctor may have learned of the Kraal plan. He
may be here to spy. It is essential for us to know.  
CRAYFORD: No, Styggron, no. They must be eliminated! They must be destroyed!

**[Space Defence Centre reception]**

(The Doctor comes through a fire door and recognises the figure with his back
to them.)  
DOCTOR: Well, well, well. It's a small world.  
SARAH: Isn't it. Hello, Mister Benton!  
(Benton turns and points his pistol at the Doctor.)  
DOCTOR: Benton?  
SARAH: Benton, it's us!  

**[Crayford's office]**

STYGGRON [OC]: You shall do as I say!  
(Crayford grabs his head in pain.)  
CRAYFORD: Ow! Ow! No! Stop! All right!  
(He uses the intercom.)  
CRAYFORD: All units. The order to kill is cancelled.

**[Space Defence Centre reception]**

(Benton suddenly sags then bends forward, hand to forehead.)  
DOCTOR: Come on.  
(The Doctor and Sarah leave the building. Benton recovers then runs along the
hall to an intercom outside Crayford's office.)  
BENTON: This is B block, main entrance. They've just escaped, sir.  
(A soldier arrives.)  
BENTON: Ah, Corporal Alert the security patrol immediately. The rest of you,
get after them! Spread out.  
(The soldiers run out of the door, and we look at the reception desk while
they whoosh shut again.)  
SARAH [OC]: Why did we come back? We should've hoofed it when we had the
chance. We're bound to be caught now.  
DOCTOR [OC]: On the contrary.  
(The Doctor stands up from behind the desk.)  
DOCTOR: The further they spread out, the better our chance of escape.  
CRAYFORD [OC]: Sullivan!  
(He ducks back down as Crayford enters, followed by a certain Naval
Lieutenant.)  
CRAYFORD: Take a mobile troop and put a cordon on the perimeter road.  
HARRY: Yes, sir.  
(Harry leaves the building.)  
SARAH: (sotto) Harry's not a soldier.  
DOCTOR: That improves our chances.  
SARAH: All our friends  
DOCTOR: Lead by a dead man. Fascinating.  
SARAH: Look, what's going on?  
DOCTOR: How do you know Crayford's dead?  
SARAH: It was that story I came here on two years ago. Why?  
DOCTOR: I don't think Crayford died in space. When he finally got back here,
something returned with him.  
SARAH: What?  
DOCTOR: Something that's controlling every human being for miles around.  
SARAH: Including Harry and Mister Benton.  
DOCTOR: Yes. Come on.  
SARAH: Where are we going?  
DOCTOR: Back to the village. We've got to warn London.

**[Woodland outside SDC]**

DOCTOR: So far so good.  
SARAH: As the man said when he fell from the skyscraper.  
(Woof, woof, woof.)  
SARAH: Dogs!  
DOCTOR: Tracker dogs?  
(They run deeper into the woodland.)

**[Woodland]**

(Sarah falls.)  
SARAH: Ah!  
DOCTOR: Are you all right?  
SARAH: Yes!  
DOCTOR: Well, come on then.  
(Sarah follows, limping slightly, but she can't really keep up with him.
Meanwhile, the Rottweiler's pick up their scent.)  
DOCTOR: Come on.  
SARAH: Can't. Hurt my ankle.  
DOCTOR: I'll carry you.  
SARAH: No, you won't. I'll only slow you down.  
DOCTOR: Give me your scarf.  
SARAH: Hmm?  
DOCTOR: Quickly, quickly, come on! I'll try to draw them off. You can hide in
the tree.  
(Sarah gives him the white scarf from her pink sailor suit.)  
SARAH: But how  
(The Doctor puts her over his shoulder and takes her to the nearest tree, then
boost her up to reach a low branch.)  
DOCTOR: Come on, up.  
(With Sarah safely up the tree, the Doctor removes his jacket and drags it and
her scarf on the ground.)  
DOCTOR: See you back at the pub. If I'm not there in an hour, try the Tardis.  
(He runs off.)  
SARAH: Doctor, I forgot to tell you  
(The Doctor is out of sight.)  
SARAH: The Tardis is gone.  
(The dogs lead the soldiers straight past her tree. A little way ahead, by a
river, the Doctor ditches his hat, jacket and scarf, and runs on. The dogs
come to a halt.)  
ADAMS: They must have swum across.  
(A dog is sniffing a shoe.)  
ADAMS: Right, you two go that way. We'll try to head them off.  
(The hunting party divides, and the Doctor comes up for air. Sarah comes down
from her tree and tries to run. Adams spots her.)

**[Kraal ship]**

STYGGRON: Report! Report!  
CRAYFORD [on monitor]: The girl is captured. We shall soon have the Doctor.  
STYGGRON: No! Locate him, but do not seize him. I have other plans for the
Doctor.

**[Styggron's lab]**

(Two soldiers carry a covered stretcher in and put it on the floor. They
remove the cover to reveal Sarah.  
Meanwhile, Devesham is once more deserted as the Doctor crosses the road to
the public telephone box. Unfortunately he cannot get a dialing tone.  
The soldiers leave Sarah strapped onto a curved bench with holes around the
side. She wakes, and struggles against her restraints.)  
HARRY: It's no good, Miss Smith.  
SARAH: Harry?  
(Harry operates a squidgy alien control on a console, and Sarah is bathed in
pulsing blue light.)  
HARRY: She's ready.  
STYGGRON [OC]: Commence the analysis of the brain.  
(The light changes to blue then yellow, and Sarah gasps in pain. She sees the
distorted face of Styggron.)

**[Fleur de Lys]**

(The Doctor enters and tries the telephone on the bar. No dialling tone. He
goes to the internal door and opens it.)  
MORGAN: Something you want, sir?  
DOCTOR: Yes. A telephone that works. Yours is out of order.  
(Morgan enters the bar.)  
MORGAN: Likely it is.  
DOCTOR: So is the village call box.  
MORGAN: There was a gale last night, sir. Brought all the lines down.  
DOCTOR: Ah. I always told Alexander Bell that wires were unreliable.  
MORGAN: Can I get you a drink, sir?  
DOCTOR: Yes, I'll have a pint.  
MORGAN: A pint of what?  
DOCTOR: Ginger beer.  
(Morgan removes the cap from a bottle and pours it into a pint mug. The Doctor
picks the darts from a table near the board.)  
MORGAN: You must be one of them scientists from the Defence Station.  
DOCTOR: Well, yes and no, or no and yes, so to speak. As it were. Do you get
much custom from there?  
MORGAN: Don't come down here much.  
DOCTOR: Really?  
MORGAN: Nothing for them in Devesham. Nothing for strangers here.  
DOCTOR: Yes. Too quiet, I suppose.  
MORGAN: Except for darts club night, of course.  
DOCTOR: Ha. Of course.  
(The Doctor throws the three darts at the board in a slightly unorthodox
style. Three bulls-eyes, of course. He goes to remove them.) DOCTOR: Hey, this
is a brand new darts board. Never been used before.

**[Kraal ship]**

(The monitor shows the view through the darts board, with the Doctor running
his hand over it.)  
STYGGRON: See? He is puzzled. Suspicious, but not certain.  
(He turns the monitor off. A second Kraal enters.)  
CHEDAKI: There is no value in this experiment, Styggron. Our strategy is
settled.  
STYGGRON: Strategy is formulated upon knowledge, Chedaki.  
CHEDAKI: The time for experiment is past.  
STYGGRON: In the case of the Earth, yes, but there are other worlds that our
people can conquer. It is important to see that our techniques are flawless,
and the Doctor is unprogrammed. A free agent.  
(Styggron turns on the intercom.)  
STYGGRON: Crayford!

**[Crayford's office]**

CRAYFORD: Yes, Styggron?  
STYGGRON [OC]: Commence the final test.  
CRAYFORD: Direct communication.

**[Kraal ship]**

STYGGRON: Yes. Are the preparations complete?

**[Crayford's office]**

CRAYFORD: There should have been sufficient time. I will check, Styggron.

**[Kraal ship]**

CHEDAKI: The data that was drained from the girl shows the Doctor's long
association with libertarian causes. His entire history is one of opposition
to conquest. While he lives, he is a threat.  
STYGGRON: His history will end soon, Chedaki, when I have nothing further to
learn from studying him.

**[Styggron's lab]**

(The examination table is empty when Crayford enters.)  
CRAYFORD: Where's the girl?  
HARRY: The analysis is completed. We have her memory print and body
parameters. They're being coded.  
CRAYFORD: Right. Well, see she's properly guarded. Styggron wants to run a
test on the Doctor. Is the programming complete?  
HARRY: Yes, sir. We can begin at once.  
CRAYFORD: Right. Good, good.

**[Fleur de Lys]**

(The Doctor is investigating a cigar in an ashtray with his magnifying glass.
Then he moves to the brasses hanging on the wall by the fireplace.)  
DOCTOR: Yuk. Plastic horse brass?  
(Morgan is standing right behind him.)  
DOCTOR: I've arranged to wait for someone here. Don't let me detain you.  
MORGAN: That's all right.  
DOCTOR: Well, I can see you're a busy man. Barrels to tap, empties to count,
that sort of thing.  
MORGAN: No hurry for that.  
DOCTOR: Right, then I'll have another pint.  
MORGAN: A pint of what?  
DOCTOR: Well, ginger pop, please.  
(Morgan goes back to the bar. The Doctor puts some coins on the counter and
looks at the calendar. He tears off the current date - Friday July 6th - to
reveal another Friday July 6th underneath, and another, and another.)  
DOCTOR: Strange. A village without a future? (The telephone rings. The Doctor
hands the receiver to Morgan.)  
MORGAN: Fleur de Lys? It's for you.  
DOCTOR: Is it? Hello? Sarah? What's happened, where are you?

**[Village shop]**

SARAH: They caught me, but I managed to escape. Listen, Doctor, I've found out
their whole plan. No. No, the inn is one of their centres. That's why I didn't
come there.

**[Fleur de Lys]**

DOCTOR: where are you, Sarah?

**[Village shop]**

SARAH: The village store. You can cut through to it behind the pub. Yes, I'll
wait for you. But Doctor, be careful. Those robot mechanics are planted
everywhere.

**[Fleur de Lys]**

DOCTOR: Don't worry, Sarah. Who'd notice me?  
(The Doctor puts the phone down, then picks it up again.)  
DOCTOR: Well, would you believe it? It's out of order again. Thanks for the
hospitality. (The Doctor leaves through the back door. Morgan does not move.)

**[Kraal ship]**

CHEDAKI: If the androids were to fail in their task, the Kraal invasion of
Earth could not even begin. Suppose the Doctor were to turn the androids
against us? It would jeopardise the whole operation!  
STYGGRON: Impossible!  
CHEDAKI: Is it? He is a scientist too, Styggron.  
STYGGRON: Well, the androids are centrally governed. Their programming is
controlled from here.  
CHEDAKI: They could be reprogrammed> He has the knowledge.  
STYGGRON: An interesting possibility.  
CHEDAKI: The androids are a double-edged weapon, Styggron. They are
unstoppable, indestructible.  
(Chedaki leaves and Crayford enters.)  
CRAYFORD: Everything is ready, Styggron.  
STYGGRON: Not quite. I need one more android, Crayford. I must call on your
experience for its production.  
CRAYFORD: But you already have my data. The memory prints in the
disorientation centre.  
STYGGRON: This is new. You must be reprocessed.  
CRAYFORD: Styggron, I can't go through that again.  
STYGGRON: I need one special unit. An android programmed to attack Kraals.  
CRAYFORD: But I don't  
STYGGRON: Do not argue, Crayford! Come!

**[Village shop]**

(The Doctor runs along a lane between quaint cottages, then crosses over to AV
& NG Kirby's shop, and enters. A bell rings as the door opens and closes.)  
SARAH: Is that you, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Yes, of course it is. How did you get away?  
(Sarah stands up from behind the counter. Somehow she has got her scarf back.)  
SARAH: Oh, thank goodness. I've been terrified!  
DOCTOR: I left you up a tree.  
SARAH: I climbed out of the tree and those soldiers were waiting for me. I was
knocked out. When I came round, I was in some kind of operating theatre.
Doctor, I was so frightened.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I'm sure you were. Have some ginger pop. Here.  
(He takes a bottle from his coat pocket, unscrews the top and hands it to her.
She drinks.)  
SARAH: It was delicious. Harry was there. Well, not the real Harry, of course,
but I thought it was.  
DOCTOR: What do you mean, not the real Harry?  
SARAH: Well, Doctor, that's what they're doing. They're copying people.  
DOCTOR: Who are?  
SARAH: I don't know, but Crayford's behind it all.  
DOCTOR: Shush.  
(The Doctor looks through the glass in the front door to see two white-suited
figures emerge from an alley and stand next to number 36.)  
DOCTOR: It can't be Crayford, but go on.  
SARAH: There's not much more to tell. They put me in some kind of machine, and
I passed out again.  
DOCTOR: How did you get away?  
SARAH: When I came round the second time, I heard Crayford talking to someone.
That's when I discovered what they're planning. They're replacing people with
these duplicates they make. Well, they thought I was still unconscious and
left me without a guard.  
DOCTOR: And you were lucky enough to find this place? And the only telephone
in the place that worked.  
SARAH: I don't understand.  
DOCTOR: I think they let you make that telephone call.  
SARAH: What do you mean?  
DOCTOR: I mean we're being tested. They want to find out how smart we are.  
(The white figures walk away.)  
SARAH: No, it can't be that.  
DOCTOR: Of course it's that. What I don't understand is, if they're so
advanced in technology, they've made facsimile human beings good enough to
stand face to face examination, and sent them through a space time warp to
Earth, what can they be afraid of? They must possess the weaponry to take the
Earth by force. They've created a bridgehead by stealth using androids. Fake
humans. Come on.  
SARAH: Where are we going?  
DOCTOR: Well, there's a radio in the Tardis. Are you coming?  
SARAH: Coming.  
DOCTOR: Let's go.

**[Styggron's lab]**

(Crayford is on the table.)  
STYGGRON: This should answer your fears, Chedaki. From Crayford's memory cells
we will now create a totally hostile android.  
CRAYFORD: Don't, Styggron, I beg you.  
(Styggron turns on the machine. The blue light pulses, and is joined by
yellow. Crayford groans in pain then passes out.)  
CHEDAKI [on monitor]: What is the purpose of this, Styggron?  
STYGGRON: Watch.  
(A skeletal android turns into a soldier.)  
STYGGRON: I will now activate the hostility circuits.  
(The soldier brings his rifle up to the ready and half crouches. He swings
round to shoot Styggron, who instead shoots him with red energy bolts from a
small hand-held device. The soldier is thrown back across the area and writhes
briefly on the floor before becoming still.)  
STYGGRON: See? They are not indestructible, Chedaki. What I can create, I can
also destroy!  
(The android returns to its skeletal state.)  
CHEDAKI [on monitor]: That weapon. It is new.  
STYGGRON: So far effective only at short range, but my armoury section is
developing a much more powerful version for our space cruisers. Science,
Chedaki! Science will make the Kraals invincible!

**[Woodland]**

(The Doctor and Sarah avoid a pair of white mechanicals then continue to the
small clearing.)  
DOCTOR: Yes, well, this is the oak tree. This is where we landed.  
SARAH: Well, it's not here now, is it.  
DOCTOR: It's not programmed to auto-operate. There's a fail safe. Unless  
SARAH: Unless what, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Of course, I know. You've still got a Tardis key, haven't you?  
SARAH: I must've lost it.  
DOCTOR: You haven't lost it. You never had it. Sarah came here, turned the key
in the lock, and cancelled the pause control. The Tardis continued on its set
coordinates back to Earth.  
SARAH: I don't understand.  
DOCTOR: Yes, you do. This isn't Earth. This isn't real wood. It's some kind of
artificial material like plastic. These are not real trees. And you're not the
real Sarah.  
(Sarah steps back and produces a pistol.)  
SARAH: Get back, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: I knew at once. You see, the real Sarah wasn't wearing her scarf.  
(The Doctor takes the scarf from his pocket, then takes off his hat and knocks
Sarah's arm down. She shoots the ground and drops the weapon. He grabs her.)  
DOCTOR: What have you done with Sarah? Where is the real Sarah?  
(The facsimile pulls away from him then falls to the ground. The face mask
falls off to reveal the circuitry inside.)

__**Part Three**__

**[Woodland]**

(The Doctor turns and runs. The android Sarah sits up and shoots at him
several times, but misses.)

**[Kraal ship]**

(The android's eye view of the woodland is on the monitor.)  
CHEDAKI: A foolish experiment, Styggron. The Doctor is at large.  
STYGGRON: There's no way of escape.  
(Styggron switches off the monitor. We see the real Sarah lying face down on a
bench.)  
STYGGRON: He can do no harm.  
CHEDAKI: He is a Time Lord.  
STYGGRON: At the end of his time. The androids are now fully trained. Both the
village and the Doctor will be destroyed in precisely nine minutes.  
CHEDAKI: Nine minutes?  
STYGGRON: The invasion countdown has begun. There will be no variation in the
schedule.  
CHEDAKI: I understand. Is there a safe method of destroying the training
ground?  
STYGGRON: A matter dissolving bomb, which I shall place in position.  
(Another Kraal enters, carrying a device the size of a coffee table style
book.)  
CHEDAKI: Good. The Earth female. She is still alive?  
STYGGRON: Yes, Marshal Chedaki. She has been preserved.  
CHEDAKI: Why?  
STYGGRON: Another of my foolish experiments. The virus which our androids will
use to cleanse the Earth of its human population has only been proved in
laboratory conditions. I wish to test it on a living human organism.  
(Styggron takes the bomb and leaves. Chedaki follows, then the Kraal.)  
CHEDAKI: Ah. Good, good. That's a good idea, Styggron.  
STYGGRON [OC]: Praise indeed, from a soldier.  
(Sarah opens her eyes and starts to get up.)  
SARAH: Nine minutes.  
(She leaves.  
Meanwhile, in the village, the vicar stands on a grass verge opposite two
white suits. The van drives up, and the Doctor watches from the other side of
a hedge as the side is dropped and the villagers climb into the back. The van
drives away and the Doctor walks into the middle of the deserted road.)

**[Kraal ship hatchway]**

CRAYFORD: Come on now. Hurry along.  
(With the village visible through the hatch, soldiers, white suits and a
villager run into the ship, past Harry.)  
CRAYFORD: Quickly now.  
(Sarah is hiding, kneeling behind Crayford. More villagers and soldiers enter.
The last in is RSM Benton.)  
CRAYFORD: Any more?  
BENTON: We're the last, sir.  
CRAYFORD: Right.  
(Benton closes the hatchway and follows the others deeper into the ship.)  
CRAYFORD: See all the blast doors are closed. You have four minutes.  
HARRY: Yes, sir. (Harry and Crayford leave in opposite directions. Sarah
reopens the hatchway and leaves.)

**[Village]**

(The Doctor is still pondering when he is grabbed from behind.)  
DOCTOR: Oh, hello.  
STYGGRON: Resistance is inadvisable.  
DOCTOR: Look here, we haven't been introduced, have we?  
STYGGRON: This is no time for niceties.  
(Styggron pushes the Doctor to the ground, and a white suit picks him up,
holding his arms tightly. A second white suit gets some plastic ivy from a
hedge and they use it to tie his hands behind him around the village cross.
Styggron places his bomb on the stone steps and activates it.)  
DOCTOR: Well, well, well. An MD bomb.  
STYGGRON: In exactly three minutes, our simulated Earth village will
evaporate, and you with it!  
DOCTOR: You're really enjoying this, aren't you?  
(Styggron turns to follow the white suits out of the village. He walks like an
orangutan.)  
DOCTOR: Don't go. Stay. Just for a few minutes. Then we can all go together.  
(The bomb's whining goes up a pitch.)  
SARAH [OC]: Doctor? Doctor?  
DOCTOR: I'm over here!  
(Sarah runs towards him.)  
SARAH: Listen, this place is going to be blown sky high. Well, don't just sit
there, come on!  
DOCTOR: I'm not just sitting here, I'm tied up.  
SARAH: What?  
DOCTOR: Knife in my right hand pocket.  
SARAH: It won't cut. It's as strong as steel.  
DOCTOR: Of course. It's their artificial ivy. Try the sonic screwdriver. Set
it to theta omega.  
BOMB: Thirty seconds. Twenty five seconds.  
(The plastic starts to melt, then breaks.)  
BOMB: Twenty seconds.  
(The Doctor runs up the road.)  
SARAH: Hang on! I know one of the ways out!  
BOMB: Fifteen, fourteen, thirteen, twelve, eleven, ten, nine, eight, seven,
six, five, four, three, two.  
(The Doctor and Sarah run through the door of an ivy covered cottage.)

**[Kraal ship hatchway]**

BOMB: One, zero!  
(Sarah closes the hatch, but they still get the effect of the shockwave before
it shuts completely. Outside, the picturesque village fades away to leave a
bleak, barren waste.)  
DOCTOR: A bit close.  
SARAH: Wouldn't have cared to have been any closer.  
CRAYFORD: Escort them to the cell. I must report this to Styggron.  
DOCTOR: Styggron? Who's Styggron?  
CRAYFORD: Move!  
(Harry and some soldiers take the Doctor and Sarah away.)  
DOCTOR: I prefer our Harry.

**[Kraal ship]**

KRAAL [OC]: Leader rocket in launch phase. Time to lift off, ninety minutes.  
STYGGRON: Have the pre-launch checks been completed?  
KRAAL: Yes, the androids are being loaded now.  
CRAYFORD: Styggron! We have recaptured the girl. She was with the Doctor.  
STYGGRON: The Doctor?  
CRAYFORD: It seems she helped him to escape.  
STYGGRON: He must be destroyed at once. Have him killed.  
CRAYFORD: Why, Styggron? There's really no need.  
STYGGRON: Oh, you're singing a different song now, Crayford. They must be
eliminated, isn't that what you said?  
CRAYFORD: That was because they were a danger to the plan, Styggron. I mean,
what harm can they do now, locked away in a cell?  
STYGGRON: The Doctor is no longer of any use.  
CRAYFORD: But he would make a valuable subject for analysis.  
STYGGRON: Analysis?  
CRAYFORD: Yes, the knowledge and experience of a Time Lord would make a, well,
a useful addition to the Kraal data banks.  
STYGGRON: You were happy for him to die, provided I killed him. You are
squeamish, Crayford. A puny minded weakling, like all your race. Oh, very
well, very well.  
CRAYFORD: Thank you, Styggron.  
(Crayford leaves.)  
STYGGRON: We shall analyse his brain, and then he shall die.

**[Kraal brig]**

(Sarah puts her scarf back on.)  
SARAH: Not on Earth? What do you mean? Of course we're on Earth.  
(The Doctor by the door with his sonic screwdriver.)  
DOCTOR: Harry and Benton and the rest are not the real thing.  
SARAH: Not real?  
DOCTOR: Fakes, copies. Electronic androids with well programmed computers
instead of brains.  
SARAH: It all makes sense now.  
DOCTOR: If I'd had my wits around me, I'd have known it from the start.
Remember that high level of radiation I'd noticed when we left the Tardis?  
SARAH: Yes, you thought there'd been a leak from the Defence Station.  
DOCTOR: That was natural radiation. The Kraal planet Oseidon is the only
planet in the galaxy with a level that high.  
(He tries the screwdriver on the door.)  
DOCTOR: This is no good.  
SARAH: Won't that radiation make us ill?  
DOCTOR: Well, It's not that bad, yet.  
SARAH: All the same, the sooner we get away from here, the better.  
DOCTOR: Quite right. Any level of radiation is too high, and it's getting
worse all the time. Won't be long before the place becomes uninhabitable.
That's why the Kraals are planning to leave and take over Earth.  
SARAH: So, everything we've seen has been a fake.  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
SARAH: But the village.  
DOCTOR: Yes, and the woods, and the Defence Station. Every last detail copied
down, including the inhabitants.  
SARAH: Like a sort of training ground.

**[Outside the brig]**

(Crayford is listening.)  
DOCTOR [OC]: Exactly. And they've hardly made a slip. One or two, perhaps,
like mint-fresh money all the same date. Otherwise, they've got everything
right.

**[Kraal ship brig]**

CRAYFORD: I've, er, been listening to your conversation.  
DOCTOR: Well, nobody's perfect.  
CRAYFORD: I hear you're impressed by the thoroughness with which this
operation has been planned.  
DOCTOR: Well, it is impressive, but doomed to fail in the end.  
CRAYFORD: Oh no, Doctor. No, shortly I shall leave for Earth. The Kraals will
project me through the space time warp and my ship will make a normal re-entry
into the Earth's atmosphere.  
DOCTOR: A normal re-entry? Crayford, you've been gone two years, assumed dead.  
CRAYFORD: Ah, yes, Doctor, but I have recently re-established radio contact
with Earth. They know about the stabiliser failure that sent me into orbit
around Jupiter. They know how I've rationed my provisions, particularly
drinking water. My recycling experiments. Already, every telescope on Earth is
trained on that little patch of sky where my XK-5 will reappear.  
DOCTOR: A gigantic hoax.  
CRAYFORD: Exactly, Doctor, yes! And all brilliantly planned by Styggron, the
chief scientist of the  
DOCTOR: But helped by you. He couldn't have done it without your knowledge and
memory.  
CRAYFORD: Yes, the Kraals have a superb technology, Doctor.  
SARAH: Why did you do it? What made you betray Earth?  
CRAYFORD: Well, didn't Earth betray me? I was written off, wasn't I? Left to
die in space. It was the Kraals who saved me. I mean, I was dying, wasn't I? I
was being torn apart by gyro failure. And they reconstructed me, Miss Smith,
in every detail. Except the one eye that for some reason couldn't be found. Oh
no, I owe them everything.  
SARAH: And that's what they want. Everything. They want the world.  
CRAYFORD: Look, the increasing radiation here means that they're a doomed
race. They just have to leave, don't they. I mean, why should a people with
such skills be allowed to die?  
SARAH: The human race has a few skills of its own.  
CRAYFORD: Yes, I know, I know. But the Kraals have promised me that no humans
will be harmed, as long as they obey the ultimatum that's been prepared. You
see, the Kraals are going to take over the northern hemisphere and live in
peace! I have their word for it.  
DOCTOR: You've been brainwashed, Crayford.  
CRAYFORD: Before my spaceship lands, the space shells with the androids inside
will be launched. Now, if anyone sees them, they'll just be taken for
meteorites, you see? And then the androids will take over the key positions in
the Defence Complex and the way will be clear for Marshall Chedaki to bring in
the main invasion fleet without a shot being fired!  
DOCTOR: I see, I see. Tell me, if your Kraal friends are so unviolent, why did
Styggron try to vaporise me?  
CRAYFORD: Oh, yes. Yes, well, they thought you were a danger.  
DOCTOR: Oh.  
CRAYFORD: You see, Miss Smith's memory prints had showed your past intense
involvement in the defence of Earth. But I have persuaded them to utilise that
knowledge. It won't be wasted. See, Styggron's machine extracts and feeds into
a computer the memory and entire intelligence of any living being. It's
painful, I know, but it's better than dying.  
STYGGRON [OC]: Service mechanics move to leader rocket loading bay now.  
CRAYFORD: I'm sorry, I have to go now. Now, trust me. I know what I'm doing.  
(Crayford leaves.)  
DOCTOR: We have to warn Earth.  
SARAH: How? We don't even have the Tardis.

**[Kraal ship]**

(Fake Harry opens a container holding another, smaller one.)  
STYGGRON: Only one drop.  
(Chedaki enters.)  
CHEDAKI: Launch countdown commences in sixty minutes, Styggron.  
STYGGRON: Careful how you handle it.  
CHEDAKI: You are testing the culture.  
STYGGRON: Yes, Marshall. That small phial contains a death sentence for the
entire human race. Be careful!  
CHEDAKI: Is it safe?  
STYGGRON: As long as only the androids have contact with the virus.  
(Harry pours a drop of the culture into a water jug, puts the jug down then
steps towards Styggron.)  
STYGGRON: No, no, no, no, no! Place it in the steriliser.  
(Harry puts the phial back in the container then hands the whole thing over to
Styggron.)  
STYGGRON: Good. Now take the tray to the detention cell.  
(Harry picks up a tray containing some bread and the poisoned water jug and
leaves.)

**[Kraal ship brig]**

(The Doctor is unscrewing a floor plate with the sonic screwdriver.)  
DOCTOR: Yes, I think this has possibilities.  
SARAH: What are you going to do?  
DOCTOR: Well, if we can somehow lure that guard in, give him a good stiff
jolt.  
SARAH: Electrocute him?  
DOCTOR: Well, randomise him, to be accurate. Remember, he's only a machine.  
(The door starts to open.)  
SARAH: Someone's coming.  
(They slide the plate over the exposed circuits and Sarah sits on it. Harry
enters with the tray.)  
HARRY: Food and drink.  
(The Doctor takes the tray.)  
DOCTOR: How thoughtful. Bread and water.  
SARAH: It's better than nothing, I suppose. I'm dying for a drink.  
(Sarah pours a glass of the water. Harry takes hold of the Doctor.)  
HARRY: You're to come with me.  
DOCTOR: Careful! You androids don't know your own strength.  
SARAH: Where are you taking him? Doctor!  
DOCTOR: Don't worry, Sarah. And don't waste the water. Remember, it's an
excellent conductor.  
(The door closes. Sarah pauses, then pours the water back into the jug.)

**[Styggron's lab]**

DOCTOR: So this is where you put Crayford together. Careless of you to lose
his eye.  
STYGGRON: Harry, I have little time.  
DOCTOR: Going somewhere, are you?  
STYGGRON: Yes, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Yes, well.  
(The Doctor tries to make a break for it, but Harry and a group of soldiers
take an appendage each and dump him on the operating table.)  
STYGGRON: Secure his limbs!  
(In the brig, Sarah lifts a power cable out of the hole under the floor panel.
Happily, it has a coupling right where she needs it, so she takes it apart and
holds it at arms length.  
The Doctor is fastened down, so Harry and the soldiers leave.)  
STYGGRON: In a moment, Doctor, the knowledge and experience of your entire
life will be transposed into our data bank.  
DOCTOR: That's stealing.  
STYGGRON: While you are making your small contribution to Kraal culture, I
shall be on my way to destroy the humans that you have so often defended. This
time, you will be powerless to help them.  
DOCTOR: So you do intend genocide.  
STYGGRON: Earth's resources are limited. They cannot be wasted supporting an
inferior species.  
DOCTOR: How do you intend to destroy the humans, Styggron? If you use nuclear
weapons, you'll raise Earth's radiation level beyond your own point of
tolerance.  
STYGGRON: Nothing so crude as fission weapons. The androids will disseminate a
virus. It will cause a contagion so lethal the Earth will be rid of its human
population within three weeks. Then it will burn itself out, and the world
will be ours.  
DOCTOR: Where will you be all this time?  
STYGGRON: Crayford's rocket will prove an effective quarantine chamber. I
shall remain inside until the virus has done its work. Then I shall signal
Marshall Chedaki to bring in our invasion fleet.  
DOCTOR: The best laid schemes of mice and Kraals gang aft agley.  
STYGGRON: What?  
DOCTOR: Something will go wrong, Styggron.  
STYGGRON: Nothing will go wrong!  
(Styggron activates the mind scanner, and the Doctor tenses.  
Sarah lays the end of the power cable by the door, and pours out the water in
front of it. Then she takes off her scarf and gets out a box of matches. Soon
smoke comes out underneath the door into the corridor. Adams opens it to
investigate. He enters, stands on the damp patch, and Sarah jabs the power
cable at him. He writhes then goes bang, staggers forward and collapses. His
head explodes. Sarah makes her escape.)  
STYGGRON: In eight minutes, Doctor, the Analyser will have completed its
recording. Unfortunately, I shall not be here to turn it off. Your brain
tissue will expand under the stimulation until eventually, your skull bursts.
I imagine it will be a most disagreeable death.  
DOCTOR: We shall see.  
STYGGRON: Defiant to the end, Doctor. But you will soon be screaming for mercy
and there will be no one here.  
(Styggron leaves. Out in a corridor, Sarah hears the machine working. She
hides as Styggron lumbers past then runs into the lab. Sarah takes one look
then goes to the control panel and turns the Analyser down. She pushes another
control, but that just ramps it up again so she quickly reverses it. Finally
it stops and she goes to free him.)  
SARAH: Doctor. Doctor, come on! Come on, wake up, Doctor! Come on! Doctor,
please, come on. Wake up.  
DOCTOR: I am awake, I think.  
SARAH: Shush.  
DOCTOR: Shush, shush, shush. Once upon a time, there were three sisters, and
they lived at the bottom of a treacle well. Their names were Olga, Masha, and
Elena. Are you listening, Tilly?  
SARAH: I'm Sarah.  
DOCTOR: What?  
SARAH: Sarah!  
DOCTOR: I feel disorientated.  
SARAH: This is the Disorientation Centre.  
DOCTOR: That makes sense.  
SARAH: Come on!  
CHEDAKI [OC]: Clear the launching area. Time to countdown, one minute.  
DOCTOR: Hurry!  
SARAH: Where are we going?  
DOCTOR: Crayford's ship. It'll be leaving in a moment. Right, right.  
SARAH: Doctor!  
(They run through the ship.)

**[Kraal ship]**

STYGGRON: The Earth female has escaped. Find her!

**[Outside Crayford's ship]**

(Out on the planet surface, judging by the howling wind.)  
DOCTOR: We're going into that rocket, Sarah.  
SARAH: What?  
DOCTOR: I said, you and I are going into that rocket!  
CHEDAKI [OC]: Time to lift off, thirty seconds.

**[Crayford's ship - hold]**

(There are several pods here.)  
DOCTOR: Come on, Sarah. We need protection or the g-force will crush us on
blast off. Come on.  
(They open a pod, which contains a man.)  
DOCTOR: It's all right. It's not activated.  
(They pull the android out of the pod.)  
CHEDAKI [OC]: Ten, nine.

**[Crayford's ship]**

(Crayford is in a spacesuit without the helmet, and Styggron is with him.)  
CHEDAKI [OC]: Eight, seven, six, five.

**[Crayford's ship - hold]**

DOCTOR: Come on, in you go. Quick! Quick!  
CHEDAKI [OC]: Four, three, two.  
(Sarah climbs into the now empty pod.)  
SARAH: It's okay, I'm in. Hurry!  
CHEDAKI [OC]: One, zero. (The acceleration throws the Doctor onto his back.)  
SARAH: It's crushing me, Doctor. Doctor.

__**Part Four**__

**[Crayford's ship - hold]**

(The rocket hurtles up through the atmosphere towards space. The Doctor taps
Sarah's nose to wake her.)  
DOCTOR: We're on the way.  
SARAH: I must have blacked out.  
DOCTOR: Yes, you did. The G-force cut the blood supply to what you humans
laughingly call your higher centres.  
(On the other side of the hold, a second Doctor lifts the lid of a pod, looks
out, then closes it again.)  
SARAH: Ha ha. I hate sarcasm, especially when I'm dying. I feel as though I've
been through a mangle.  
DOCTOR: It was a gentle massage compared to what's ahead.  
SARAH: Oh, no, don't tell me. I don't want to know.  
DOCTOR: Yes, you do. Just before Crayford puts the ship into re-entry orbit,
these containers will be shot out like pips from a lemon.  
SARAH: How?  
DOCTOR: Through the cargo shuttle ejectors. And we'll be in them.  
SARAH: Oh.  
DOCTOR: Ask me why.  
SARAH: Why?  
DOCTOR: Because they'll reach Earth before the ship. There's no other way we
can warn the Defence Station.  
SARAH: And what are we going to use for air?  
DOCTOR: Oh, there'll be enough to last the few minutes in space. I'm more
concerned about the efficiency of these retro tubes.  
SARAH: Why, don't they work?  
DOCTOR: Oh, I imagine they'll work well enough for the androids to survive
impact, but we could be in for a nasty jolt.  
SARAH: So, providing we don't burn up on re-entry, and aren't suffocated on
the way down, we'll probably be smashed to a pulp when we land.  
DOCTOR: Exactly. Sarah, you've put your finger on the one tiny flaw in our
plan.  
SARAH: Our plan? It's your plan.  
DOCTOR: Well, I'm open to suggestions if you've got a better idea.  
SARAH: How long before we start all this?  
(The Doctor listens to the change in the rocket note.)  
DOCTOR: Quite soon. They're beaming us through the space time warp now.

**[SDC Scanner room]**

(A controller at the back, a row of three consoles and one large map showing
the orbital path of whatever they are tracking at the time.)  
GRIERSON: Bearing one four three.  
TESSA: I've got him.  
MATTHEWS: There he is!  
GRIERSON: Contact confirmed. Well done, Tessa.  
(The map zooms in to the West Country and Wales.)  
MATTHEWS: It's the XK-5 all right, exactly as scheduled.  
(Grierson reports to his superiors over the telephone.)  
TESSA: Incredible, isn't it, after two years.  
GRIERSON: Colonel Faraday? Ah, hello, sir, this is the scanner room. We've
picked up Crayford's ship, sir. Yes, absolutely on the button. Right, sir. The
old man's coming down.

**[SDC reception]**

(This time there is a receptionist at the desk. The real RSM reports to the
real Surgeon Lieutenant.)  
BENTON: Well, we've searched the area for them, made enquiries in the village.
No sign of the Doctor or Miss Smith anywhere.  
HARRY: Well, he'll turn up when he feels like it. I'm sure there's nothing to
worry about.  
BENTON: Yes, I just hope you're right.  
HARRY: You're a pessimist, Mister Benton. What could possibly happen to the
Doctor in Devesham Woods?  
BENTON: It's just that I've never known him leave the Tardis with the key in
it before.  
(The Colonel walks along from his office. Look, it's Mother from the Avengers,
played by Patrick Newell.)  
FARADAY: Come along, men. Crayford's been spotted on the scanners.  
HARRY: Oh, that's great, sir.

**[SDC Scanner room]**

MATTHEWS: Hello, XK-5, hello, XK-5. This is Devesham Control calling XK-5. Do
you read me, do you read me?  
(Matthews carries on calling as Faraday, Harry and Benton enter behind
Grierson's console.)  
GRIERSON: It's on the master scanner, sir. Right on course.  
FARADAY: This is a moment for history, Grierson.  
GRIERSON: It is that, sir.  
HARRY: A two year journey.  
FARADAY: He's been further into space than any other human being.  
(Harry and Benton swap glances, but don't challenge the statement.)  
MATTHEWS: XK-5, this is Devesham Control calling XK-5. Do you read me, do you
read me?  
CRAYFORD [OC]: (static) Come in Mission Control. This is XK-5. I'm receiving
you loud and clear.  
MATTHEWS: Okay, XK-5. Stand by, stand by.  
GRIERSON: Sir, would you care to.?  
FARADAY: Oh, yes, thank you. Thank you.  
(Faraday takes a microphone from Grierson.)  
FARADAY: Hello, Crayford. Colonel Faraday here. I, er, well, what can one say
at a moment like this, except welcome home.  
CRAYFORD [OC]: Thank you, sir. Earth certainly looks pretty good from up here.
I've had some problem with one of the  
FARADAY: What's that? Re-entry?  
GRIERSON: Not yet, sir. There's something else coming in on the same path.  
FARADAY: Something else?  
GRIERSON: There's a fireball or something. It's broken into meteorites, look.  
(The screen shows a cluster of dots over the mouth of the Severn. In the
rocket's hold, the pods are lowered through the floor, presumably to be
launched.)  
TESSA: They're down to seventeen thousand metres.  
FARADAY: Never mind the meteorites. Have we still got contact with the ship?  
GRIERSON: He's just hit the upper atmosphere, sir. It looks like a perfect re-
entry path.  
MATTHEWS: He'll be back in the mess in time for late breakfast.  
HARRY: No, he won't, Matthews. Not after two years in space.  
MATTHEWS: That meteorite shower's really coming in.  
BENTON: Yes, but don't they usually burn up before they hit the Earth?  
MATTHEWS: This lot's not going to. There's something funny about them.  
(The map shows them heading inland towards Oxfordshire.)  
FARADAY: Something funny?  
MATTHEWS: I swear they're slowing down.

**[Landing site]**

(The pods land in the real Warsham quarry. The Doctor opens his pod with his
knees and climbs out. He staggers slightly then looks around.)  
DOCTOR: Sarah? Sarah? No Sarah. No Sarah. No Sarah.  
(He walks off to find her pod.)

**[SDC Scanner room]**

(Everyone waits anxiously to reacquire Crayford's signal after re-entry
blackout.)  
CRAYFORD [OC]: XK-5 to control.  
HARRY: He's made it.  
GRIERSON: He's through.  
CRAYFORD [OC]: This is XK-5 calling control.  
TESSA: Devesham Control to XK-5. We're locking on.  
CRAYFORD: (on radio) Roger, Devesham.  
TESSA: Ignition minus thirty, on my mark. Mark.  
(A picture of Crayford in space helmet comes up on the wall screen.)  
CRAYFORD [on screen]: Mark thirty. AGS reading four hundred plus one.  
TESSA: Ten seconds to ignition. Mark.  
CRAYFORD [on screen]: I have ignition, Devesham. Starting descent.  
MATTHEWS: Altitude forty thousand metres. Thirty nine, thirty eight thousand.
Descent velocity six fifty metres per second.  
FARADAY: He'll be landing in a few minutes. Everything you need, Sullivan?  
HARRY: I've got the tools of the trade here, sir.  
GRIERSON: You're looking good, Commander.  
CRAYFORD [on screen]: Good for me, too. I hope you've got some champagne on
ice down there, have you?

**[Devesham Wood]**

(Sarah finds the Tardis, with the key still in the lock.)  
SARAH: Doctor?  
(She looks inside.)  
SARAH: Doctor?  
(There is a pod nearby. A twig breaks, she swings round then someone taps her
on the shoulder.)  
SARAH: Oh! Doctor, don't do things like that.  
DOCTOR: I'm sorry. I had to be sure. You see, there's a replica of you around
somewhere.  
SARAH: Well, my replica wouldn't be as glad to see you as I am.  
(There's a rocket noise overhead.)  
SARAH: What's that?  
DOCTOR: The rocket is coming in to land.  
SARAH: Well, we'd better hurry if we're going to warn them.  
DOCTOR: It would suit our purposes better if no one was warned.  
(The pod behind them opens, and another Sarah sits up. The 'Doctor' has his
left hand tucked inside his fastened jacket, as if it is injured.)  
SARAH: You're not the real Doctor.  
(It tries to grab her with its one good hand, and misses. Sarah runs off. It
goes to help fake Sarah out of her pod, using both hands.)  
DOCTOR 2: Come. We have much to do.

**[SDC Scanner room]**

GRIERSON: You're cleared for landing, XK-5.  
CRAYFORD [on screen]: Roger. Coming down now.  
MATTHEWS: Coming down nineteen five hundred, at seventeen. Four hundred
metres. Two fifty. Two hundred.  
TESSA: Slight drift to right.  
CRAYFORD [on screen]: Correcting three forward. Three forward. Easy, easy.  
MATTHEWS: Docking contact.  
CRAYFORD [on screen]: Ascent engines command override off. Engine off. That's
it, boys, crack the bubbly!  
(The screen goes blank.)  
GRIERSON: The XK-5 has landed, sir.  
FARADAY: Well done. Well done! Come along, Sullivan. We'll go aboard.  
HARRY: Yes, sir.  
MATTHEWS: Coffee, anybody?  
GRIERSON: Oh, make mine black, please.  
MATTHEWS: What about you, Tessa?  
BENTON: Can I use your phone, Grierson?  
GRIERSON: Yes, of course.  
TESSA: Yes, I could really use a coffee.  
(The staff leave.)  
GRIERSON: Commander Crayford?

**[Crayford's rocket]**

GRIERSON [OC]: Colonel Faraday and the MO are on their way up now, sir.  
CRAYFORD: Thanks. I'll be waiting.  
(And so will Styggron.)

**[SDC reception]**

DOCTOR: Can you tell me where I could find the Commanding Officer?  
ADAMS: Yes, sir. He's in the scanner room.  
DOCTOR: Thank you.  
ADAMS: Excuse me, sir. Can I see your pass, please?  
DOCTOR: Yes. There we are.  
ADAMS: Oh, yes. That's all right, sir, thank you.  
DOCTOR: Thank you. Is this the first time you've seen me today?  
ADAMS: What? Yes, sir.  
DOCTOR: Good. Now, if you do see me again today, I want you to report it to me
immediately. I'll be with the CO in the scanner room.

**[SDC Scanner room]**

(Benton is making a date on the telephone.)  
BENTON: Yes, yes. Make it eight o'clock outside the Chinese takeaway. And
don't be late.  
GRIERSON: You've got her well trained.  
BENTON: Yes, well, to be honest with you, it's my kid sister. I'm taking her
to a dance at the Palais tonight.  
(The Doctor enters.)  
BENTON: Doctor! Where have you been? We've been looking all  
DOCTOR: Where's Harry?  
BENTON: Mister Sullivan? He's gone up to the rocket with Colonel Faraday.  
DOCTOR: Call him down.  
GRIERSON: I can't do that, sir.  
DOCTOR: Call him down.  
BENTON: Better do as he says.  
GRIERSON: Hello?  
(The Doctor takes the microphone from Grierson.)  
DOCTOR: Give it to me. Harry? Harry, can you hear me?  
HARRY [OC]: Hello, Doctor. Is that you?  
DOCTOR: Yes, it is. Don't go into that rocket.  
FARADAY [OC]: I don't understand. What the Dickens is going on?  
DOCTOR: Just trust me, Colonel. If you go into that rocket, your lives will be
in deadly danger.  
FARADAY [OC]: Chap's insane.  
HARRY [OC]: I think we ought to do as he says, Colonel.  
DOCTOR: Harry, bring the lift down. I'll explain it all then.  
FARADAY [OC]: Very well, Doctor, but the explanation had better be good.  
GRIERSON: The lift's started down again, sir.  
DOCTOR: Good.  
MATTHEWS: Mister Benton?  
BENTON: Yes?  
MATTHEWS: Could you spare a minute, please?  
(Benton and Matthews leave.)  
DOCTOR: What controls the angle of your radar dish?  
GRIERSON: This one here, sir.  
DOCTOR: Give me a pen.

**[SDC corridor]**

ADAMS: What is going on here?  
(Matthews hits him from behind. Adams falls across the body of Benton.)  
BENTON 2: Have them taken away.

**[SDC Scanner room]**

(The Doctor completes his circuit diagram.)  
DOCTOR: Could you do that?  
GRIERSON: Well, it's possible. It would take a bit of time, though. I'd have
to re-jig about eleven circuits there.  
DOCTOR: All right. Well, you get about it.  
GRIERSON: You can't  
DOCTOR: Tell no one what you're doing.  
GRIERSON: You can't point the radar dishes down here, sir! They'd jam every
radio and electronic equipment for miles. There'd be chaos.  
DOCTOR: Nothing like the chaos there'll be if you don't do it, Grierson.  
(Faraday and Harry enter.)  
FARADAY: Doctor! What the devil's going on?  
DOCTOR: An invasion of Earth is going on, Colonel.  
FARADAY: What?  
DOCTOR: Let's go to your office. You've got some important phone calls to
make. Crayford's sold you out to the Kraals.  
FARADAY: Kraals? Never heard of them.

**[Faraday's office]**

HARRY: You've actually seen these androids, then, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Indeed I have.  
FARADAY: I'll not have my command infiltrated by aliens.  
HARRY: Sir, they may already be among us.  
DOCTOR: They've made replicas of you and Harry, Colonel.  
FARADAY: Of me?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
FARADAY: Confounded cheek. How dare they!  
HARRY: Colonel, I think I should run a complete medical check on everyone.  
FARADAY: Good idea, Sullivan. That'll nail 'em, eh, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Yes, but it would take too long. We can use this.  
(The Doctor takes a small thin box with a red light on it out of his pocket.)  
HARRY: What's that?  
DOCTOR: It's a robot detector. It lights up in the presence of androids.  
(It lights up.)  
FARADAY: Thing must be faulty.  
DOCTOR: I don't think so. I see I was just too late.  
DOCTOR 2: A pity you had to find out.  
(The fake Doctor is in the doorway, pointing a gun at him.)  
DOCTOR 2: We didn't want any shooting until our takeover was complete.  
DOCTOR: Hello, Doctor. We've been waiting for you.  
DOCTOR 2: Stand back, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: You know, the resemblance is astonishing. For a moment, I thought I
was seeing double.  
(The Doctor slams the door shut on the android then leaps head first out of
Faraday's window.)

**[SDC car park]**

SARAH: Doctor, this way!  
(The Doctor dodges his double's bullets as he runs towards her.)

**[Faraday's office]**

FARADAY 2: Attention, attention.

**[SDC reception]**

FARADAY 2 [OC]: It has been confirmed the Doctor is attempting to sabotage our
defence system. He is at large somewhere inside the complex.

**[SDC]**

FARADAY 2 [OC]: Saturation search will begin at once. He is armed and
dangerous, and all personnel have the authority to shoot on sight. That is
all.  
SARAH: So the androids have taken over.  
DOCTOR: Looks like.  
SARAH: What about the real Harry and Colonel Faraday?  
DOCTOR: They must be up there in the rocket with Styggron.  
(They look round the corner of a building at the rocket sitting high above
them.)  
SARAH: We've got to help them somehow.  
DOCTOR: Our only chance is to stop the androids before they take over the
complex.  
SARAH: Where are you going?  
DOCTOR: To the scanner room. You stay here, Sarah.

**[SDC reception]**

BENTON 2: Hold it, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Don't be a fool, Benton, I'm one of you. Didn't you hear the Colonel
just now? The Doctor's not here, he's at large somewhere in the complex.  
BENTON 2: Oh yes, of course, sir. I'm sorry, sir.  
DOCTOR: That's all right, Benton, but keep your wits about you. Nobody knows
who's who around here.  
(Meanwhile, Sarah climbs the metal staircase of the rocket gantry.)

**[SDC Scanner room]**

DOCTOR: Have you finished, Grierson?  
GRIERSON: Almost there, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Come on. We haven't got a second to lose, man.

**[SDC reception]**

BENTON 2: Hold it, Doctor.  
DOCTOR 2: Don't be a fool, Benton, I'm one of you.  
(Benton shoots, to no effect.)  
DOCTOR 2: Satisfied?  
BENTON 2: But I, but I thought you were. He passed me just a minute ago.  
DOCTOR 2: Which way did he go?  
BENTON 2: To the scanner room.

**[SDC Scanner room]**

GRIERSON: There. I've done it.  
(Grierson puts the circuit board in place and the radar dish moves down.)  
GRIERSON: All I have to do now is switch on the power.  
DOCTOR: Good.  
(But before he can press the button labelled Radar Power, he is shot.)  
DOCTOR 2: A clever way to jam android circuits, but not quick enough.  
CRAYFORD: What's going on?  
DOCTOR 2: The Doctor has interfered in our plans for the last time.  
CRAYFORD: But Styggron promised me there would be no killing.  
DOCTOR 2: Fool. Do you really think the Kraals will spare humanity? Styggron
has a virus in your ship that will destroy every man, woman and child in the
world.  
CRAYFORD: Styggron wouldn't do that. He's a surgeon, a genius. Look what he
did for me!  
DOCTOR: He did nothing for you, Crayford. Absolutely nothing at all. Except
brainwash you.  
CRAYFORD: That's not true.  
DOCTOR: You were hijacked by the Kraals, Crayford. Nothing went wrong with
your rocket, Crayford. You weren't even injured. Take off the eye patch and
look for yourself.  
(Crayford walks over to a mirror on the wall. He rips off the eye patch then
storms back to the lift to the rocket. The Doctor kicks the gun out of the
android's hand but gets punched out for his trouble. The android sounds the
alarm.)

**[SDC reception]**

HARRY 2: The scanner room.

**[SDC Scanner room]**

(The Doctor tries to get to the radar power button. The android jumps over the
console and throws the Doctor across the room, where he ends up within arms
reach of his target. The android picks up a chair to hit him with as fake
Harry and fake Benton enter, followed by fake Faraday. The Doctor switches on
the power and they freeze.)

**[Crayford's ship - hold]**

SARAH: Harry?  
HARRY: Sarah? Sarah, where  
SARAH: Harry!  
(Faraday and Harry are tied up on a lower level.)  
HARRY: What's going on?  
SARAH: It's a long story. For a start, you've got a very nasty twin.  
HARRY: Twin?

**[SDC Scanner room]**

DOCTOR: Are you all right?  
GRIERSON: Yeah, I think so, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Good.  
(The Doctor picks up a hat, realises it belongs to the android and throws it
away in disgust.)  
DOCTOR: Where's Crayford?  
GRIERSON: He went back to the rocket.  
DOCTOR: Did he? (The Doctor puts his own hat on.)

**[Crayford's rocket - hold]**

(Sarah is untying Harry and Faraday.)  
FARADAY: It's all very well, but what are these androids?  
SARAH: Shush! I keep telling you. They're robots controlled by Styggron.  
(Styggron enters.)  
STYGGRON: The enterprising Earth girl! No! Don't move. The sensors indicated
an intruder. I hardly expected to find it was you.  
SARAH: No, I suppose you thought I was still a prisoner on your planet.  
STYGGRON: I know the Doctor managed to escape, but you must indeed have a
charmed life.  
SARAH: What are you getting at?  
STYGGRON: You were to have been the first human victim of the billions to be
destroyed by this virus.  
(Styggron holds up the container.)  
STYGGRON: How did you escape death? Did you not drink the water?  
SARAH: Water.  
CRAYFORD: Styggron! You have betrayed me.  
STYGGRON: Betrayed you? I used you, Crayford, as I use the androids, but you
are no longer of any value.  
(Crayford attacks Styggron and the virus container falls to the floor.
Styggron throws Crayford off and shoots him with his ray gun.)  
DOCTOR: Excuse me.  
(The Doctor hits Styggron double-fisted, sending him head over heels to land
on the virus container, which breaks and starts to dissolve his skull.
Styggron still manages to shoot the Doctor. He falls next to Sarah, Harry and
Faraday.)  
SARAH: Doctor! Oh, no!  
DOCTOR: Don't waste any tears on him, Sarah. He's only an android.  
SARAH: An android?  
DOCTOR: Yes, my replica. I reprogrammed it to confuse Styggron.  
(The duplicate Doctor turns into a bare android.)  
SARAH: Please, don't ever do anything like that again.  
DOCTOR: Come on.

**[Devesham Wood]**

SARAH: Oh, how could we ever have been fooled?  
DOCTOR: How do you mean?  
SARAH: Well, this really is Earth.  
DOCTOR: Are you sure?  
(The Doctor puts a fern frond in his hat band. They arrive at the Tardis.)  
DOCTOR: After you.  
SARAH: Uh uh. I'm going home, and I'm going by taxi.  
DOCTOR: Oh. I'll make you an offer. I'll take you home.  
SARAH: How can I refuse?  
(They enter the Tardis, and it dematerialises.)  
  
---  
  
<Back to the episode listing

Doctor Who and related marks are trademarks of BBC . Copyright  1963,
Present. The web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment
purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

