

**Nightmare of Eden**  
  
Original Airdate: 24 Nov, 1979  

__**Part One**__

**[Empress bridge]**

(A large space liner makes the jump to warp.)  
RIGG: We seem to be ahead of schedule, Secker.  
(Secker has a silly grin on his face.)  
SECKER: Great.  
RIGG: What?  
SECKER: The sooner the better.  
RIGG: Oh.  
(He makes a broadcast.)  
RIGG: Captain here. We're coming out of warp in thirty seconds.

**[Empress Passenger deck]**

(On the passenger deck, everyone is dressed in sunglasses, hooded silver
jumpsuits and seated in rows of three seats, airplane style. A pleasant female
voice makes an announcement.)  
COMPUTER: This is your flight computer speaking. We are about to go into orbit
around the planet Azure. Passengers may leave their seats when the blue light
comes on, but are requested not to remove their protective coveralls until
instructed. Will passengers please remember that the Empress will be at seven
tenths G, so please be careful when you first start to move around. Thank you.

**[Empress bridge]**

(A red light suddenly lights up on the Captain's console.)  
RIGG: I've got a malfunction. Check it out, will you?  
(Secker just sits grinning to himself.)  
RIGG: Secker, these coordinates are wrong. Did you set these?  
SECKER: What's a few degrees?  
RIGG: What's a few degrees? What's the matter with you, man? We're flying an
interstellar cruise liner, not riding a bicycle!  
SECKER: So?  
RIGG: So we shall be going into the wrong orbit!  
SECKER: So?  
RIGG: Well, it could mean delays. It could. Oh.  
(Rigg tries to correct it himself, then suddenly a small red spaceship appears
right in front of them as they come out of warp.)  
RIGG: Oh no!  
(As the Empress solidifies, the red ship is stuck into her forward section.)  
RIGG: Mayday, mayday, mayday. This is cruise liner Empress reporting
collision. Space collision on approach to Azure.

**[Empress corridor]**

(Two crewmen run to where the two ships have joined as alarm bells ring. The
taller one uses a hand-held communicator.)  
RIGG [OC]: Damage control, report to the bridge.  
CREWMAN: The two ships are sticking straight through each other, sir.  
RIGG [OC]: Any blowouts? How's the pressure?  
CREWMAN: Everything's okay except we can't get through to some of the
passenger sections. They're blocked off. The hull of the other ship, sir, is
sticking right across the entrance to B deck.

**[Empress bridge]**

RIGG: A deck, report. A deck, are there any casualties?  
(Just static on the monitor.)  
RIGG: Have you got that damage report yet? Well?  
(Rigg hauls the grinning, stoned Secker out of his chair and takes his place.)  
RIGG: Oh, it's all your fault, Secker. I'll carry the can. I'll lose my job
but you, you'll never work in West Galaxy again. Go on, check the power, man.
Come on, move yourself! This is an emergency!  
(Secker saunters over to a grid on the wall and presses a button.)

**[B deck]**

(The Tardis materialises close to a hatchway where the red ship is clearly
visible. The Doctor and Romana come out.)  
DOCTOR: Hmm.  
ROMANA: Fascinating.  
DOCTOR: Bit of a mish-mash.  
ROMANA: Why wasn't there an explosion?  
DOCTOR: Well, one of the ships must have been in dematerialised form when it
happened. Nasty. Could cause terrible problems.  
K9: Affirmative. The overlap areas are highly unstable, master.  
DOCTOR: Yes. Interfaces, I should say.  
K9: Affirmative.  
ROMANA: I don't think we should interfere.  
DOCTOR: Interfere? Of course we should interfere. Always do what you're best
at, that's what I say. Now, come on.

**[By the airlock]**

(On beige level, blond man in a white pressure suit and carrying a helmet
comes out of the airlock just before Romana and the Doctor walk round the
corner.)  
ROMANA: Who was that?  
DOCTOR: I don't know.  
ROMANA: Shall we follow?  
DOCTOR: At our own pace.

**[Empress bridge]**

(The man in the pressure suit is with the Captain.)  
DYMOND: What are you going to do about the damage to my ship?  
RIGG: Mister Dymond, I am concerned with my ship, my crew, and nine hundred
passengers. We're fully covered comprehensive on all third party damage, so
don't worry.  
DYMOND: I was involved in the most important job, and you just come crashing
in on me, then you tell me not to worry? What am I going to do for a ship?  
RIGG: The Company will compensate you. Get in touch with your insurance
people!  
(The Doctor and Romana enter unnoticed.)  
DYMOND: Then I insist that you sign a document to the effect that this
collision was entirely your fault!  
RIGG: I can't do that! What were you doing there, anyway? You were right in
the middle of a launch and land window for commercial flights.  
DYMOND: I was given complete clearance from Azure Control. You were off
course!  
DOCTOR: Gentlemen, gentlemen, please. I'd say it was knock for knock, wouldn't
you?  
RIGG: What? Are you a passenger?  
DOCTOR: No, no. We answered your mayday. I'm from Galactic Insurance and
Salvage. Been having a look around. This is my assistant, Romana. I'm the
Doctor. How do you do?  
RIGG: How'd you do. What's that?  
DOCTOR: Oh, K9? Well, a computer of sorts.  
RIGG: It looks more like a dog. Does he bark?  
DOCTOR: No. But he has been know to bite. Aren't we going to introduce
ourselves?  
RIGG: Oh, yes. My name's Rigg, Captain Rigg.  
DOCTOR: We just met.  
RIGG: Yes. Er, this is Mister Dymond, the owner of the other vehicle involved
in the, er, incident.  
DOCTOR: How do you do.  
RIGG: Salvage, you say?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
RIGG: Yes, well, I can't discuss anything until I've spoken to the Company.  
DOCTOR: What about a better idea? Why don't we try to separate the ships?  
DYMOND: Impossible.  
DOCTOR: I like doing the impossible.  
ROMANA: If it's possible to get into the situation, theoretically it should be
possible to get out of it.  
DOCTOR: Oh, you've spoilt it now.  
ROMANA: But look, at the time of the collision this ship was partially
dematerialised.  
DOCTOR: Therefore if we can recreate identical circumstances the ships could
be separated.  
ROMANA: It's just a question of exciting the molecules. Put your ship on full
thrust.  
DOCTOR: Then full reverse.  
ROMANA: Well, it's worked before, you know.  
DOCTOR: I preferred it when it seemed impossible.  
RIGG: Yes, well, it might work if I could get any power.  
DOCTOR: Are you pressing the right button?  
RIGG: Of course I am.  
DOCTOR: Can we switch on the wreck of the power unit?  
RIGG: Well, we could do, but it's dangerous.  
DYMOND: Worth a try anything to get out of this mess.  
RIGG: It could damage your ship.  
DYMOND: That's nice coming from someone who's just crashed into it. I'll risk
it.  
DOCTOR: All right, all right. Where's the power unit?  
RIGG: Secker'll show you. Secker, take the Doctor to the power unit.  
DOCTOR: Good. No, Romana, you stay here. I might need you. I'll take K9. K9?
K9?  
K9: Affirmative, master. Affirmative.  
(Secker, the Doctor and K9 leave.)  
RIGG: Well, Romana, why don't you and Mister Dymond wait in the lounge?  
ROMANA: Right.  
RIGG: Just down the corridor on the right.  
(Romana and Dymond leave. Rigg goes to a monitor and calls up the details of
Galactic Salvage and Insurance. Formed London Earth 2068. Liquidated 2096.)

**[First class corridor]**

(Secker stops grinning and leans against the wall.)  
SECKER: You go down here to section five, then left into the shuttlebay, and
down to level B. You can't miss it.  
DOCTOR: Hold on, I thought the idea was you'd show me.  
SECKER: I've told you, haven't I? What's the difference? I'm busy.  
(Secker walks off.)  
DOCTOR: How very odd.  
K9: Affirmative.

**[Luggage area]**

(They follow Secker as he staggers into a darkened area and watch as he uses a
keycard to open a filing cabinet. He takes out a small container and leaves.
The Doctor enters, uses his sonic screwdriver to open the cabinet and gets
another container out. He opens it and offers some of the contents to K9 on
his hand for analysis.)  
DOCTOR: Any idea what this is, K9?  
K9: A fungus. Source of the drug XYP.  
DOCTOR: Yes?  
K9: Dangerous, addictive. Known as Vraxoin.  
DOCTOR: Vraxoin? I've seen whole communities, whole planets destroyed by this.
It induces a kind of warm complacency and a total apathy. Until it wears off,
that is, and soon you're dead. Come on.

**[Lounge]**

(A bespectacled man with a vaguely teutonic cum slavic accent is holding forth
to Romana. His female assistant stands nearby.)  
TRYST: It is my ambition to become the first zoologist to qualify and quantify
every species in our galaxy. One more trip and I may achieve it.  
ROMANA: Are you planning another?  
TRYST: Ah, well, the next is always on my mind, but is a question of finance.
I was hoping to meet a sponsor on Azure, but this accident may have ruined my
chances.  
ROMANA: A sponsor?  
TRYST: Yes, well, the government used to fund me, but the galactic recession
put a stop to that. Now all they do is to assign me special travel facilities
on government subsidised spacelines, but first class.  
ROMANA: What's that machine?  
(A free standing object about a metre tall with a diamond shaped box on the
top.)  
TRYST: Ah, that is my CET machine. The Continuous Event Transmuter. It is an
invention of mine. I will show you.  
(He switches the machine on, and a whole wall sized screen set up a little way
forward of the end of the lounge lights up. It shows a landscape with
mountains in the distance, some trees and mist on the ground.)  
ROMANA: It looks as if you've invented the cinematograph.  
TRYST: What you see may seem to be just a mere projection, but it is in fact a
matter transmutation.  
DELLA: You see, when we've collected the specimens for study, they're
converted into electromagnetic signals and stored on an event crystal in the
machine.  
TRYST: And they go on living and evolving.  
DELLA: In the crystal.  
TRYST: This image projection allows us to see them whenever we wish. The flora
and the fauna are actually in a crystal. I hope you can appreciate what a
technical achievement that is.  
ROMANA: A crude form of matter transfer by dimensional control.  
TRYST: Crude?  
ROMANA: Well, prototype. And you could have problems with it.  
TRYST: Problems? But it works perfectly.  
ROMANA: Nothing works perfectly.  
TRYST: Oh, yes, but  
ROMANA: What about the materialisation collision? It's caused all sorts of
unstable matter interface. They'll probably affect the dimensional matrix of
your machine.  
TRYST: The what?  
ROMANA: Have you thought of that?  
TRYST: Are you claiming superior knowledge?  
ROMANA: Equal, perhaps.  
DYMOND: I wish everyone would stop showing off and get something done about my
ship.

**[Empress bridge]**

RIGG: We seem to have to have a slight problem, Azure. We're doing out best to
sort it out and meanwhile we'll continue to orbit. Rigg out.  
(The Doctor harrumphs.)  
RIGG: Ah, Doctor. The man from Galactic.  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
RIGG: Back so soon?  
DOCTOR: Yes. I'll tell you something about your man Secker.  
RIGG: What about him?  
DOCTOR: He ran away.  
RIGG: Yes, well, he has been behaving rather strangely. Seems to be in a
different world.  
DOCTOR: Yes. Perhaps he's unwell. Can I have a look at your log and check to
see if he's been to any planet where he might have picked up Vraxoin?  
RIGG: Doctor, this is the milk run. Station nine to Azure, Azure to Station
nine. A straight charter for the whole season.  
DOCTOR: What about one of the passengers? One of them could have been the
carrier, so to speak.  
RIGG: No, Doctor. They've all had prevocation checks. The Azurian authorities
insist on it.  
DOCTOR: Anyone else?  
RIGG: Tryst.  
DOCTOR: Tryst?  
RIGG: Yes. A zoologist. He arrived at Station nine after a long expedition
with his equipment and he's looking for a holiday.  
DOCTOR: Where had he been?  
RIGG: Well, all over. Oh, but he's all right. We checked him over.  
DOCTOR: Yes, but I'd still like to know where he's been.  
RIGG: Yes, and I'd like to know just who you are.  
DOCTOR: Me?  
RIGG: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Well, I told you. I'm from Galactic.  
RIGG: Galactic went out of business twenty years ago.  
DOCTOR: I wondered why I hadn't been paid.  
RIGG: Now that's not good enough.  
DOCTOR: That's what I thought. Where can I find Tryst?  
RIGG: Well, he's in the first class lounge.  
DOCTOR: Good, good. Look, you try and find Secker and meet me in the first
class lounge and  
RIGG: Yes, and  
DOCTOR: No, no. Do you want this ship repaired or not?  
RIGG: Well, yes, of course I do.  
DOCTOR: Well then, just find Secker and meet me in the lounge in five minutes.  
RIGG: But I  
DOCTOR: Bye.

**[B deck]**

(Secker is blissed out again, and walking towards the intersection of the two
ships.)  
RIGG [OC]: Secker, report to the bridge.  
(He disappears into the void.)

**[Lounge]**

DOCTOR: Really? Then where did you go?  
TRYST: We went through the Cygnus gap.  
DOCTOR: What?  
TRYST: And then we did a slingshot over to a small system, just three planets,
M37. You know?  
DOCTOR: I do.  
TRYST: The second planet supports life in a very early stage of evolution. The
molluscs, the algae, the primitive insects. I can show you.  
DOCTOR: No, no, no, that's perfectly all right. I'm just interested in the
voyage. It's fascinating.  
TRYST: Here you are, a copy of my log. I published it to go with my lectures.  
DOCTOR: The Volante.  
TRYST: Yes, the name of my ship.  
DOCTOR: And you invented this marvellous machine to collect your specimens?
You know, I knew a man once who toyed with an idea like this. What was his
name? Professor Stein?  
TRYST: Professor Stein?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
TRYST: Oh, a dear friend. He was my mentor. We worked on this idea together
before he died, of course. Then we stopped. You knew him?  
DOCTOR: Yes, well, by reputation. He once gave a seminar on the  
DYMOND: Doctor, Doctor, Doctor. All very well reminiscing but don't we have an
urgent problem to deal with? I'm anxious to be on my way.  
DOCTOR: Of course. You're extremely anxious to be on your way.  
DYMOND: Yes. You see, I didn't actually expect a spaceliner to materialise
halfway through my ship today.  
DOCTOR: No.  
RIGG: Doctor, we can't locate Secker. My men are still looking.  
DOCTOR: Could you take me to the power unit yourself?  
RIGG: Well, yes, all right.  
DOCTOR: Good, good. Tryst, thank you very much for your story. Very
interesting. We must have a chat about this machine of yours sometime.  
TRYST: Yes.  
DOCTOR: And about the notion of your capturing alien species for your own
private zoo.  
TRYST: Zoo?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
TRYST: No, Doctor, this is important scientific research. I am helping to
conserve endangered species.  
DOCTOR: By putting them in this machine?  
TRYST: Oh, yes.  
DOCTOR: Ah, yes, of course. Just in the same way a jam maker conserves
raspberries.  
(The Doctor and Rigg leave.)  
ROMANA: Oh, don't mind him. He just likes to irritate people.  
(Romana picks up the copy of Tryst's log.)  
TRYST: Yes, well, he has a right to criticise. I suppose. Still, I'm very
pleased to have someone of intellect to speak with again, after such a long
voyage cooped up with all the same peoples.  
ROMANA: How many were on your ship?  
TRYST: Ah, well, to begin with there was ten, but we lost one.  
ROMANA: How?  
TRYST: He died.  
ROMANA: How did he die?  
TRYST: He died.

**[Corridor]**

RIGG: Did you find out anything from Tryst?  
DOCTOR: No. K9 checked all the planets he'd been to.  
K9: Affirmative.  
DOCTOR: None of them could explain Secker's condition.  
RIGG: Are you certain?  
DOCTOR: Absolutely sure.  
(They round a corner to see the interface of the two ships.)  
RIGG: Oh dear.  
K9: Caution. Area of overlap is highly dangerous. Molecular structure of the
two ships is incompatible, causing matter interface.  
RIGG: What?  
DOCTOR: Fascinating. The two ships are rejecting each other. Molecularly
speaking, that is.  
RIGG: Like a tissue transplant, you mean.  
DOCTOR: Exactly. Exactly. Is there another way to the power unit?  
RIGG: Well, we can try from below the shuttlebay. We'll have to cut our way
through. I could put in a request for lasers, have them sent up from Azure.  
DOCTOR: That won't be necessary. I've got my own equipment.

**[Lounge]**

(Romana goes to the CET machine and turns the dial on the top from Bros to
Ranx. Other choices available are Gidi, Eden, Zil, Vij, Darp and Lvan. Another
landscape appears, this time a plain whose trees have round balls on the top.
Gidi has a duststorm blowing. Eden is a dark, dense, lush tropical forest with
birdsong. Romana walks forward. There is a human male partially concealed in
the foliage. He moves out of sight. Della enters the lounge.)  
DELLA: What are you doing?  
ROMANA: Oh, I was just having a look. I hope you don't mind.  
(Della switches the machine off.)  
DELLA: I don't, no.  
ROMANA: Then why have you switched it off?  
DELLA: I don't mind. Tryst does. This machine's his baby. Nobody touches it
except for him.  
ROMANA: Has it ever gone wrong?  
DELLA: No. Why should it?  
ROMANA: Pff. Lots of reasons. Do you think I could just have a look at that
last one? Eden, I think it's called.  
DELLA: No, not that one.  
ROMANA: What's the matter?  
DELLA: It's just that Eden brings back such unpleasant memories for me. That
was where we lost the other crewmember.  
ROMANA: Oh, I see. He was a friend of yours.  
DELLA: More than that, but it doesn't matter now. Excuse me.

**[Interface below the shuttlebay]**

RIGG: We won't be able to make it, Doctor. The place to cut through is beyond
that overlap.  
DOCTOR: Where's the power unit?  
RIGG: Up there.  
(A man's scream comes from inside the interface. Rigg and the Doctor run in.)  
K9: Caution, master. You're entering a matter interface.  
(They drag Secker out. He has three large scratch marks down the side of his
face.)  
RIGG: What the devil did that?  
DOCTOR: I don't know.  
(Rigg uses his communicator.)  
RIGG: Medics level four. Meet you at the elevator. Move!  
DOCTOR: K9, see if you can find anything in there.  
K9: The mist is a matter interface and therefore dangerous, master.  
DOCTOR: Just go near the edge.  
(They drag Secker away.)  
K9: Affirmative, master.  
(K9 trundles in then backs straight out again.)  
K9: Sensors will not function in the environment, master.

**[By the lift]**

(The Doctor accompanies Rigg on the elevator to level 4 where the Captain puts
Secker onto a gurney brought by two medics.)  
RIGG: Let's get him to the sickbay, quick!

**[Luggage area]**

(The Doctor returns to where the drugs were stashed. Someone wearing a very
large ring on their left little finger has got the cabinet open. The Doctor
looks around then notices a gun pointed at him.)  
DOCTOR: Hello. No wait, please.  
(The Doctor gets shot. The mystery figure takes the Vraxoin sample from his
coat pocket and leaves.)

**[Sickbay]**

(Medics work on Secker's injuries in an isolation booth. Rigg and Della watch
through an observation window.)  
RIGG: It was an attack by somebody, or something.  
DELLA: Horrible. But why?  
RIGG: I don't know. Have you ever seen anything like that before?  
DELLA: No. No, I haven't.  
(Tryst enters.)  
TRYST: Ah, Captain, I get your message. What is the problem?  
RIGG: Look at this.  
TRYST: Where did this happen?  
RIGG: Down under the shuttlebay. Secker was in one of the matter interfaces.  
TRYST: Yes, that could be the answer. Who knows what forces exist in an
unstable zone such as that?  
RIGG: You didn't hear the scream. Tryst.  
(They move away from Della.)  
RIGG: You didn't bring any live specimens on board my ship, did you?  
TRYST: Oh, no, Captain. I assure you. No, all my specimens are laser crystal
recordings.  
RIGG: Good, good.  
(He returns to the observation window. The chief medic shakes his head.)

**[Corridor]**

(K9 leads the way down a dim corridor.)  
K9: This way, mistress.  
ROMANA: How far?  
K9: Approximately seven metres and closing.

**[Luggage area]**

ROMANA: Doctor! What happened?  
DOCTOR: I. Bushwhacked!  
ROMANA: What?  
K9: Please clarify. Statement does not compute.  
DOCTOR: Bushwhacked!  
K9: Oh. Bushwhacked. Cowardly attack by a person or persons unknown.  
DOCTOR: Gone.  
ROMANA: Has something been stolen?  
DOCTOR: Yes. Someone aboard this ship is smuggling drugs. Vraxoin.  
ROMANA: Vraxoin!  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
ROMANA: I thought that was stamped out long ago.  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
ROMANA: The only known source was destroyed, wasn't it?  
DOCTOR: That's right. They incinerated an entire planet. Someone's found
another source.

**[Empress bridge]**

DYMOND: What is the man doing? He comes up with a marvellous idea then he
fiddles about.  
RIGG: I've got my own problems, Dymond, including a dead navigator. And now
the Doctor says he's going to blast his way into the shuttlebay. How do I
explain a great gaping hole in the side of the ship?  
DYMOND: I just wish he'd get on with it. I've got a schedule to keep.  
RIGG: So have I.

**[By the lift]**

ROMANA: Doctor, this machine.  
DOCTOR: What, the lift?  
ROMANA: No, not the lift, the CET machine.  
DOCTOR: What about it?  
ROMANA: It doesn't just take recordings.  
DOCTOR: Oh no, the animals themselves are converted into magnetic signals, and
their habitats.  
ROMANA: So he's left bald patches on the planets he's visited?  
DOCTOR: Yes. The CET machine's just an electric zoo. For cages, read laser
crystals. Either way, the animals are trapped inside.  
ROMANA: I hope so.  
DOCTOR: What do you mean?  
ROMANA: Well, you saw how primitive the device was. It's terribly unstable.
This ship is full of unstable matter zones. It gives me the creeps. It wasn't
just a mirage that attacked Secker.  
RIGG: Killed him.  
DOCTOR: What?  
RIGG: Secker's dead. They couldn't save him.  
DOCTOR: That's a pity. He might have been able to say what attacked him.  
(The lift finally arrives.)  
RIGG: I asked Tryst, but he couldn't help either.  
DOCTOR: Right, first things first. Romana, you take care of the CET machine.  
(The Doctor puts Romana into the lift.  
ROMANA: What are you going to do?  
DOCTOR: Separate the ships. Come on, Rigg.  
(Romana runs into the empty lounge and switches on the CET machine. She sets
the dial to Eden and walks towards the projection.)

**[Corridor]**

DOCTOR: Well, Captain, you'll have to show us the best place.  
RIGG: It's a pity we can't get further up there, and I don't want to damage an
airseal or cut through a stress point.  
DOCTOR: Oh, I'm sure K9 will be careful, won't you, K9?  
K9: Affirmative, master.  
DOCTOR: Go. Make it as big as you can, K9.  
(K9 starts cutting into the bulkhead at just below shoulder height.)  
RIGG: Very handy, that machine of yours, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: He's not just a mobile blowtorch, you know. He's saved my life on lots
of occasions. Beat me at chess, once. Shush.  
(Up in the first class lounge, something like a speck of light comes out of
the Eden projection and touches Romana's neck. She collapses.  
K9 finishes cutting.)  
RIGG: Right, Doctor, give me a hand.  
(They remove the cut section, and a Thing with claw-like hands reaches out
towards them.)

__**Part Two**__

**[Corridor]**

(K9 fires at the alien creature and it retreats.)  
RIGG: What the devil was that?  
DOCTOR: I don't know.  
RIGG: And what in the name of the suns is it doing on board the ship? First a
collision, then a dead navigator, and now a monster roaming about my ship!
It's totally inexplicable.  
DOCTOR: Nothing's inexplicable.  
RIGG: Then explain it!  
DOCTOR: It's inexplicable. We'd better put it back.  
(He puts the cut section of bulkhead back into its hole and K9 welds it in
place.)  
RIGG: It must have been that that got Secker.  
DOCTOR: Maybe, but Secker was a dead man already.  
RIGG: What do you mean?  
DOCTOR: He was taking Vraxoin.  
RIGG: Oh, no.

**[First class corridor]**

RIGG: None of my passengers could have brought it on board the ship.  
DOCTOR: Dymond's ship?  
RIGG: No, I've scanned it. Still, I'll scan the Empress again.  
DOCTOR: Yes, the Vraxoin must be found.  
RIGG: Yes, it's bad stuff.  
DOCTOR: Bad stuff? It's the worst. I've seen whole planets ravaged by it while
the merchants made fortunes.  
RIGG: Your people knew it would be on board, did they?  
DOCTOR: What, my people?  
RIGG: Well, you're an agent, aren't you?  
DOCTOR: No! I'm the Doctor. I keep telling you that.  
RIGG: Yes, but who do you work for?  
DOCTOR: Work for? I don't work for anybody. I'm just having fun.  
RIGG: Everybody works for somebody.

**[Empress bridge]**

RIGG: If there's any Vraxoin on board, it'll show up on the scan.  
(Rigg presses buttons, and a schematic of the Empress comes up on the monitor.
The scan is a pair of vertical lines slowly moving from bow to stern.)  
DOCTOR: Can you check the whole ship with this?  
RIGG: Every nook and cranny. Nothing in the forward section.  
(The scan lines vanish briefly then restart.)  
DOCTOR: Secker kept his in the luggage area. I took what was left then someone
took it from me. After stunning me, that is.  
RIGG: Who?  
DOCTOR: Yes, who indeed.  
RIGG: Nothing.  
DOCTOR: Is there any possible shield against that scan?  
RIGG: No, no, no.  
DOCTOR: Really?  
RIGG: Well, any shield would be too small to hide any useful quantity of the
stuff.  
DOCTOR: Yes, a small thick tube. Very mysterious.  
RIGG: But this drug is hardly our most pressing problem.  
DOCTOR: Yes, I know, I know. We've got to get the ships separated.  
RIGG: Yes, but how to get through to the power unit?  
DOCTOR: Yes. You know, there might be a way we can do it using my ship.  
RIGG: Your ship?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
RIGG: Yes, where is your ship, by the way?  
DOCTOR: Oh, around.  
RIGG: Well there you go again. How do I know I can trust you?  
DOCTOR: Yes. Or I you, Captain.  
RIGG: Oh, that's hardly the point.  
DOCTOR: Yes, but who's helping whom?  
RIGG: All right, what do you want me to do?  
DOCTOR: Right, when I give the word, I want Dymond to put his ship on full
power. Trust me, Captain.

**[Lounge]**

(Someone in heavy boots leaves Romana lying on the floor just before Della
comes in.)  
DELLA: Romana! Are you all right?  
ROMANA: I don't know. I think so.  
DELLA: What happened?  
ROMANA: Oh. I must have fainted.  
DELLA: Was it anything to do with the machine?  
ROMANA: Yes. I was watching the projection, and then I. Oh. It isn't on
anymore. I just felt hot. I must have fainted.  
DELLA: I asked you not to put that particular image on.  
ROMANA: Yes, I know, but as I was on my own I thought I'd just have another
look. Besides, you assured me that it was perfectly safe, didn't you.  
DELLA: Of course. I'll tell you what. I'll get you something to drink. You
look quite pale.

**[Vending area]**

(Della goes through to the vending area just off the main lounge, opposite the
projection, and punches buttons on the dispenser.)  
RIGG: Ah, Della.  
DELLA: Oh, hello, Captain.  
RIGG: That's just what I was after.  
(A mystery hand pours the contents of a small bottle into the dispensed
drink.)  
DELLA: Oh, it's for Romana. She's fainted. I'll get one for you.  
(She takes out the glass and puts it on a table.)  
RIGG: Fainted, you say? It wasn't something she saw, was it?  
DELLA: No, I think she just felt hot.  
RIGG: Oh, why don't I just take this one.  
DELLA: Help yourself.  
RIGG: Thanks.  
(Rigg leaves with the dosed glass, and Della takes the fresh one back to the
lounge proper.)

**[B deck]**

(The Doctor brings a piece of equipment out of the Tardis, with the power cord
trailing inside.)  
DOCTOR: I want to get as close as possible.  
K9: Predict only sixty percent chance of success, master.  
DOCTOR: Tell me, K9, how is it that, how is it you always look on the black
side of things?  
(The Doctor expands the equipment into a purple laser on an adjustable stand.)  
DOCTOR: Here am I, trying a little lateral thinking, and what do you do? You
trample all over it with logic.  
K9: It is a question of the localised power available, master. I predict  
DOCTOR: Sixty percent. I heard you, I heard you. But it's worth a try. Now,
come on. Let's go and find your mistress. Come on. Come on.

**[Empress bridge]**

DYMOND: I've got to be away soon or I'll lose my contract. A year's work for
nothing. Do you realise that? It's all your fault, Captain. You were off
course.  
RIGG: And you shouldn't have been in that sector.  
TRYST: Gentlemen, please. Blaming each other won't help anything. The only
person who seems to be able to do anything constructive is the Doctor, and we
must support him.  
RIGG: Yes, yes. I just wish we knew more about him. You know he's got some bee
in his bonnet about drug smuggling on the ship.  
TRYST: Drug smuggling?  
RIGG: Yes. There isn't any evidence to back up his suspicions. There isn't a
trace of any drug anywhere on the ship at all. Still, I think that's the least
of our worries.  
(And finished his dosed drink.)

**[Lounge]**

DOCTOR: Are you sure about that? That creature came through the picture?  
ROMANA: Yes.  
DOCTOR: You were right about this machine. It is unstable, and that creature's
escaped from its electric zoo. I wonder where it came from?  
ROMANA: A planet called Eden.  
DOCTOR: Eden?  
ROMANA: Do you know it?  
DOCTOR: Well, it rings a bell.  
(Tryst enters.)  
TRYST: Ah, Doctor. I have a message for you. Oh, I'm so delighted that you are
taking an interest in my CET machine.  
DOCTOR: I'm absolutely amazed.  
TRYST: Yes. Well, it is rather impressive, isn't it.  
DOCTOR: No, I mean I'm amazed at you, Tryst, using a machine like this when
it's still so primitive. The whole thing's utterly unstable.  
TRYST: Well, I value your opinion, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Good, good. I value my life and this machine makes me fear for it.  
TRYST: It does?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
TRYST: Well, what do you think is so wrong?  
DOCTOR: Well, at a rough guess I'd say the spatial integrator, transmutation
oscillator, hologistic retention circuit. Shall I go on?  
TRYST: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Dimensional osmosis damper?  
TRYST: Er, the what?  
DOCTOR: You mean you haven't even got a dimensional osmosis damper? Professor,
you don't realise how unstable this machine is.  
TRYST: Yes, yes, all right, Doctor. In spite of your interest, I have decided
to shut it off until I've had a chance to make some adjustments.  
DOCTOR: Well, I'm delighted to hear it.  
TRYST: Yes, no, no, and it doesn't matter what you are saying, I'm going to
switch it off.  
DOCTOR: Good!  
TRYST: Yes. Oh, I nearly forgot.  
DOCTOR: What?  
TRYST: The message. The separation of the ships. Dymond is waiting for you.  
DOCTOR: I'm on my way. Romana, off to the Tardis. I'll give you details later.
Tryst! Don't you forget to switch that off.

**[Empress bridge]**

(Rigg is rather too happy with life.)  
RIGG: You know what, Dymond? The Empress has eaten your ship. Ha ha! Eaten it.  
DYMOND [on monitor]: I don't see why you find it so funny. After all, you
stand to lose your Captaincy over this.  
RIGG: Yeah, I know, I know, I know. I mean, that's funny in itself, isn't it.  
(The Doctor enters.)  
DOCTOR: Stay there, K9. Stay there. Right then, Dymond. Ready for another try?
I want you to put your ship on full power. Not now. When I tell you.  
DYMOND [on monitor]: Right, Doctor.  
RIGG: Where are you going to be, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Here, if it's all right with you. Romana's in my ship. I can keep an
eye on things from here.  
RIGG: Oh, be my guest.  
DOCTOR: Thank you. Romana?  
ROMANA [on monitor]: All ready, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Good, good. We're just waiting on Dymond. K9?  
K9: Yes, master?  
DOCTOR: Just in case your prediction is correct, go along to one of the
blurred areas and take a reading for me.  
K9: Affirmative.  
DOCTOR: Good dog.  
K9: Success only sixty percent owing to factors of localised energy.  
DYMOND [on monitor]: Ready when you are, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Good. Start building up power.  
RIGG: Well, I'll leave you to it, Doctor. I'm thirsty.  
(Rigg leaves.)  
DOCTOR: Romana, get ready. What did you say? Romana, get ready.  
(K9 arrives at an interface point, which clears. He trundles forward towards a
door labelled power unit, then it goes blurred again. He vanishes.)  
DYMOND [on monitor]: I'll have to switch off, Doctor. My ship's breaking up.  
DOCTOR: No, no. Come on, Dymond, now. Don't lose your nerve. We're almost
there. Just a bit longer.  
DYMOND [on monitor]: No, she won't take it!  
DOCTOR: Romana, switch off. Something's wrong. I'll go and find K9. He's
taking a reading for me.

**[By the interface area]**

(K9 is at the power unit door when the Doctor arrives at the blurred area.)  
DOCTOR: K9? K9, where are you? K9? He must have slipped through. Good boy, K9!  
A figure in passenger coveralls and dark glasses comes out of a door behind
the Doctor. He turns.)  
DOCTOR: Ah, could I have a word with you, please?  
(The figure runs away. The Doctor follows. The figure runs into the lift, so
the Doctor takes the stairs down. The figure gets out at a lower floor just
before the Doctor gets there. The chase continues into the passenger area.)

**[Passenger area]**

(The Doctor bursts into Passenger Pallets 67-90, to discover that the
coveralls and glasses are what all the passengers are wearing.)  
WOMAN: What's going on?  
DOCTOR: I'm looking for a man dressed just like you.  
MAN: When are we going to land? We've been stuck for ages. How much longer?  
DOCTOR: Which way did he go? This way?  
MAN 2: Maybe that's the entertainment?  
(The Doctor's quarry goes out through the rear door. The Doctor follows him
through another compartment.)  
DOCTOR: Excuse me.  
(And another.)  
DOCTOR: Excuse me.  
(And another.)  
WOMAN 2: What's the meaning of this? Why aren't we going down to Azure?  
DOCTOR: I promise you, everything possible is being done.  
WOMAN 2: But what are they doing about it?  
DOCTOR: Here, have a jelly baby and don't forget to brush your teeth.  
(The running man gets back to the lift and heads back up. The Doctor does not
run up the stairs.)

**[By the interface area]**

(The man is waiting at the top of the stairs when the Doctor arrives in the
lift. He produces a gun then runs round the corner to an interface area.)  
DOCTOR: I only wanted a word with you, whoever you are. You took something
from me, old chap. I'd rather like to have it back.  
(The man runs into the mist, and the Doctor follows.)

**[Lounge]**

(The drugged Captain Rigg is finding life highly amusing at present.)  
RIGG: Little ships in big ships. Ships in bottles. Russian dolls, that's what
it's like. You remember those?  
(Tryst shakes his head.)  
ROMANA: Yes, I do. I wonder if the people who made them realised they were
making a model of the universe?  
RIGG: A what? Eh?  
ROMANA: As a primitive concept, you know.  
TRYST: I don't think the Captain is in a mood to discuss philosophy. Can I get
you anything, Rigg? A caffetine capsule, perhaps? RIGG: No, let's talk about
life while I await my dismissal and eventual execution for dereliction of duty
and I really couldn't care less.  
TRYST: Oh, come on, Captain. The Doctor may still come up with something.  
RIGG: The Doctor. The enigmatic, almighty Mister Fix-it. He's failed again and
I don't care about that either.  
ROMANA: Not yet. I'd better go and see what he's doing.  
TRYST: Oh, please.  
(Romana leaves.)  
RIGG: Hey. Hey, it's them. They're the ones who are doing the drug smuggling,
you know? So the Doctor isn't going to do anything at all, right?

**[In the interface]**

(They seem to be running forever.)  
DOCTOR: I just want to talk to you. I promise you, you'll enjoy it. Stop!

**[Lounge]**

RIGG: Okay, so the Doctor's an agent. Yes, that's it. He's a narcotics agent.  
TRYST: And we must give him all the help that we can. Here, drink this. It'll
make you feel better. There. And Romana, is she an agent too?  
RIGG: What if she is? I mean, I don't care. What does it matter? I mean,
nothing matters at all.

**[By the lift]**

ROMANA: Doctor?

**[In the interface]**

(The mystery man jumps the Doctor from behind.)  
DOCTOR: What are you doing?  
(He wrestles the Doctor to the ground, then the creature from the wall
arrives.)

**[By the interface area]**

ROMANA: Doctor? Where are you?  
(The growling can be heard, then the creature walks out of the mist. Someone
shoots it several times before it backs away, then the Doctor crawls out.)  
ROMANA: Doctor! Are you all right? There's a creature in there. It's horrible.
We've got to get away. What were you doing in there? Come on!  
DOCTOR: Romana, stop. Do you know I've just come through an interface? That's
no mean feat. I'm not even sure I'm all here.  
ROMANA: You mean you've been right through to the other side?  
DOCTOR: Yes, I have, I have. Did you see anyone while I was in there?
Coveralls, dark glasses.  
ROMANA: Well, someone shot at that creature and drove it off.  
DOCTOR: It must have been the chap I was chasing. The fellow who jumped me in
the luggage section. Still, I know something about him now. He dropped his
radiation band in the struggle just now. Look. Volante.  
ROMANA: Tryst's ship?  
DOCTOR: Yes.

**[Lounge]**

(Tryst switches on the CET machine. It is set to Eden. Della enters.)  
DELLA: What's the matter with Captain Rigg?  
TRYST: Oh, I think he found the whole thing a little too much, but he'll be
all right.  
DELLA: Good. I thought you told the Doctor you wouldn't use the CET again?  
TRYST: Ah, yes, but I'm using for his benefit, Della.  
DELLA: Oh?  
TRYST: Yes. The Doctor is looking for someone on this ship who is carrying
Vraxoin.  
DELLA: Vrax?  
TRYST: Yes, Vrax. The Doctor is probably a narcotics agent, so we are all
under suspicion. So I thought perhaps that we might put our own house in
order, as it were.  
DELLA: How do you mean?  
TRYST: Well, Della, I've been thinking about Stott, our sadly lamented crewman
and your close friend, and his strange behaviour on Eden. Might it be him who
discovered a new source of Vrax? But he died, of course, didn't he.  
DELLA: What are you suggesting?  
TRYST: No, Della, I'm sorry to do this, but I must be certain about a few
things, not the least to eliminate the possibility that the Volante and my
expedition was used to transport this detestable substance. Now let us assume,
for a moment, that it was Stott. He must have had an accomplice. Someone who
would take over from him when he died.  
DELLA: Are you accusing me?  
TRYST: No, no, no, I'm not accusing you, Della. I'm just asking you. Was it
Stott?  
DELLA: Of course not. I knew him. He wouldn't do anything like that.  
TRYST: Then why did he disappear for two hours on Eden, the day before he was
killed?  
DELLA: I don't know. I don't know anything about that.  
TRYST: Of course.

**[First class corridor]**

DOCTOR: Rigg said Tryst and Della were the only ones from the expedition to
come aboard.  
ROMANA: A stowaway?  
DOCTOR: Well, we have to ask Rigg.  
ROMANA: He's hit the bottle.  
DOCTOR: What?  
ROMANA: He doesn't care about anything anymore. He just laughs and giggles the
whole time, sick grin on his face.  
DOCTOR: Well, that doesn't sound like drunkenness to me.  
ROMANA: Vraxoin? Where from?  
DOCTOR: Well, inside the projection set. It's the only place. Romana, we've
got no choice.  
ROMANA: What do you want to do?  
DOCTOR: What we have to do. We've got to get inside that machine. Come on.  
(Tryst comes round the corner behind them.)  
TRYST: Ah, Doctor. Doctor, Rigg has told me about the drugs.  
DOCTOR: Oh, really.  
TRYST: Yes. Doctor, I believe I can help you over this problem.  
DOCTOR: You can?  
TRYST: Yes. Er.  
DOCTOR: Romana, please.  
(Romana leaves.)  
TRYST: Doctor, I'm very sad to say that I think the drugs were smuggled on
board my ship, and I'm pretty certain I know who it was.  
DOCTOR: You are?  
TRYST: Yes. One of my crew. But he was killed. But I think he passed the drugs
on before he died.  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
TRYST: Yes. To Della.  
DOCTOR: What!  
TRYST: I question her, of course, but she wouldn't admit it.  
DOCTOR: Well, maybe it's because she's innocent. How'd you know she did it?  
TRYST: Doctor  
(An alarm sounds.)  
DYMOND [OC]: Calling the Doctor. Would the Doctor please report to the bridge
immediately.  
DOCTOR: Thank you, Tryst.  
(Tryst leaves the way he came. The Doctor walks round the corner to Romana.)  
DOCTOR: Did you hear that?  
ROMANA: Della, indeed.

**[Power unit]**

K9: Have located power unit. Awaiting instructions, master.  
(K9 sticks his laser out at the creatures surrounding him.)

**[Bridge]**

(The Doctor and Romana enter to find Dymond with two black-leather clad men.
The little peaked caps mark them out as officious jobsworths even before they
open their mouths.)  
DYMOND: Ah, Doctor. This is Waterguard Fisk and Landing Officer Costa of the
Azurian Excise. I've been telling them  
DOCTOR: Good, good. Now listen.  
FISK: Can I see your ident plaque?  
DOCTOR: Can I just tell you something, please?  
FISK: Let me see it. Now.  
DOCTOR: On this ship  
FISK: The plaque, please, sir.  
COSTA: (to Romana) And yours, please.  
ROMANA: I haven't got one.  
DOCTOR: Neither have I.  
FISK: That's extremely serious.  
DOCTOR: Drugs. Vraxoin.  
FISK: Names and dates of birth. Come on, come on.  
ROMANA: Romana.  
FISK: Romana who?  
DOCTOR: Will you please listen? Someone aboard this ship is smuggling drugs.  
COSTA: Name and date of birth.  
DOCTOR: Well how would I know? I don't even know who he is yet.  
COSTA: Your name and date of birth.  
DOCTOR: Oh, well, I'm called the Doctor. Date of birth difficult to remember.
Sometime quite soon, I think.  
FISK: I would advise you not to play the fool with us.  
ROMANA: We wouldn't want to.  
DOCTOR: Would you please listen? Vraxoin is the biggest killer drug in
existence and it's on this ship!  
FISK: All in good time.  
DOCTOR: There's no good time. The criminals must be caught.  
FISK: Costa.  
COSTA: Right. I'll start with you.  
(Costa runs an electronic sniffer wand over Romana.)  
COSTA: She's clean.  
(It's the Doctor's turn.)  
DOCTOR: You're wasting your time.  
(Beep beep)  
FISK: What is it?  
COSTA: Vraxoin. Traces of it in his pocket.  
FISK: So, the criminals must be caught, eh, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Oh, for heaven's sake, Fisk  
FISK: You're under arrest.  
DOCTOR: All right. Can I just say one thing at this moment?  
FISK: Well?  
DOCTOR: It's simply that. Look!  
(The Doctor points to the monitor. Fisk and Costa turn, and the Doctor and
Romana run out.)  
DOCTOR: We've only got a few seconds.  
(The Doctor hits the door close button, trapping Fisk, Costa and Dymond inside
briefly.)

**[Lounge]**

(The Doctor closes the door.)  
DOCTOR: Quick, Romana. CET machine, quickly.  
ROMANA: It's running.  
DOCTOR: Get me Eden.  
(The Doctor blows the lock with his sonic screwdriver then takes a piece from
the CET machine.)  
ROMANA: Now what do we do?  
DOCTOR: Test an old theory of mine. Come on.  
ROMANA: But we can't. It's unstable!  
DOCTOR: Come on, Romana. We must, we must.  
ROMANA: We'll get torn apart.  
DOCTOR: We've got no alternative. Come on. Come on.  
(He takes her hand and they run into the projection of the jungle of Eden.)

__**Part Three**__

**[Eden]**

DOCTOR: Well, how do you like Eden?  
ROMANA: I don't.  
DOCTOR: Might give us a few answer, though.  
ROMANA: Which way?  
DOCTOR: Let's go east.  
ROMANA: How do you know which way is east?  
DOCTOR: Well, I don't. We'll go that way and we'll call it east.  
ROMANA: Why not call it north?  
DOCTOR: All right, we'll call it north.  
ROMANA: North-east?  
(Something large roars nearby.)  
DOCTOR: (sotto) Can we go, please?  
(They tiptoe off into the dark jungle, followed by one of those creatures.)

**[Lounge]**

(Fisk, Costa and Dymond get the doors open.)  
FISK: Doctor!  
(They stare briefly at the projection of Eden.)  
FISK: Come on, you may as well give yourself up.  
COSTA: There must be another way out of here.  
DYMOND: I don't know.  
FISK: There's got to be. What's that?  
DYMOND: It's a door.  
FISK: It's locked. Get Tryst.  
(Dymond leaves.)

**[Eden]**

ROMANA: How did you know we could get into the projection?  
DOCTOR: The same way I knew we could get into the Tardis. Tryst doesn't
realise what he's stumbled on. At least, I don't think he has.  
ROMANA: A relative dimensional field?  
DOCTOR: Yes. All this is recorded on laser crystal. When it's played back  
ROMANA: It's restructured on an intradimensional matrix.  
DOCTOR: Yes, well, roughly speaking.  
ROMANA: So without the dimensional osmosis damper, everything gets mixed up
together and we can just walk straight into the projection.  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
ROMANA: And anything else can just walk straight out.  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
ROMANA: I've never met such idiots as those customs men.  
DOCTOR: Idiots? They're worse than idiots, they're bureaucrats. They just
exist to tangle people up, wrap them round and round in red tape until they
can't move. Romana?  
ROMANA: Yes?  
DOCTOR: I can't move.  
(Roots are wrapping themselves around their legs. The Doctor has one round his
throat. A giant Venus flytrap opens its mouth and starts to reel him in.)  
DOCTOR: Don't wriggle, don't wriggle. It'll realise it's got dinner.  
ROMANA: Dinner?  
DOCTOR: Yes. It eats people.  
ROMANA: Doctor!  
DOCTOR: Quick, over there. The root.  
ROMANA: Root?  
DOCTOR: Root, root!  
(Romana pulls a very big root over to the Doctor, who bites it. Green yuk
spurts out and the plant relaxes its grip on them, then collapses.)  
ROMANA: Are you all right?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
ROMANA: Let's get out of here.  
DOCTOR: You know, that didn't taste at all bad.

**[Lounge]**

TRYST: I can't turn it off. The selector's gone. It's difficult to believe the
Doctor would do this. Why?  
FISK: The man is a criminal, that's why.  
TRYST: I don't see the logical connection.  
FISK: Well, criminals are like that.  
TRYST: Oh.  
FISK: Now, this other exit, can you open it?  
TRYST: It leads to the first class bathroom. The Doctor couldn't open it, it
opens by personal key.  
FISK: It's the only way he can  
(Tryst opens the door. Fisk and Costa go in to search for the Doctor.)  
TRYST: I think the Doctor is in serious trouble, Dymond. It's a pity. Such a
brilliant mind.

**[Eden]**

(More nearby growls. The Doctor and Romana duck down by a large rock.)  
ROMANA: Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Shush. It's waiting for us to make any kind of sound.  
(The creature lumbers slowly past.)  
DOCTOR: (sotto) It's gone. Now take care.  
(They take a few steps forward. The Doctor smiles then the creature leaps up
in front of them. Romana squeals and they jump back. A man comes out from
behind a plant and shoots at the creature.)  
ROMANA: What was that?  
DOCTOR: I don't know. Hello there, thank you very much. We're terribly
grateful to you for saving our lives.  
ROMANA: Who are you?  
STOTT: The name's Stott.  
DOCTOR: Stott! Stott of the Tryst expedition?  
STOTT: Yes.  
(The Doctor hands over the radiation band.)  
DOCTOR: Yours, I believe. I'm the Doctor, this is Romana. We're travellers and  
(Growls)  
DOCTOR: Come on, this way.  
STOTT: I know a safe place. Follow me.

**[Stott's module]**

(Stott brings them into a prefabricated building with diamond windows,
shelves, table and chairs, bunk, and various bits of equipment.)  
DOCTOR: Not bad, not bad at all. How long have you been here?  
STOTT: A hundred and eighty three days. They left me for dead on Eden. I tried
to get back here to call the ship, and I got caught up in the event
transmuter.  
ROMANA: How did you get those marks?  
(Three scars on his face, like Secker had.)  
STOTT: A mandrel. The thing I saved you from.  
ROMANA: Mandrel. Doctor, they're called mandrels.  
DOCTOR: Well, Stott, you've got some explaining to do. A hundred and eighty
three days here?  
STOTT: Yes. I thought I was going to be stuck here for the rest of my life.
There were a few times when I felt like blowing my brains out. The hardest
thing was being able to look out and see Della.  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, quite. Tell me, when did you first discover you could get
out of the projection?  
STOTT: After the accident. Something must have gone wrong with the CET
machine. The edge of the projection was shimmering.  
DOCTOR: Really?  
STOTT: I decided I had nothing to lose, so I walked straight through it and
found myself on the Empress. Then I took one of the passenger coveralls so I
could walk about unnoticed.  
DOCTOR: Why didn't you tell Tryst and Della you'd got out?  
STOTT: Because of what I am and what I'm doing.  
DOCTOR: Really?  
STOTT: I'm a Major in the Intelligence section of Space Corps, on a special
assignment to find out who's drug running.  
DOCTOR: Ah ha. You thought it was me, didn't you.  
STOTT: For a while. Then I overheard you and Romana talking in the lounge.  
ROMANA: Tryst thought it was you, and now he thinks it's Della.  
STOTT: Tryst's a fool. He knows nothing. He didn't even realise his expedition
was being used to transport a new sort of Vrax that someone had found.  
ROMANA: Yes, if you store in on crystal in the CET machine, it can't possibly
show up on a molecular scan.  
STOTT: He must have arranged somewhere along the line for a pick-up. They'd
have to get the stuff out of the projection and pass it on.  
DOCTOR: Yeah. You've got the stuff I had?  
STOTT: Just a tiny sample. Secker must have found it. He may even have been
involved himself.  
DOCTOR: Yes, but more important is where the main supply is hidden and where
it comes from.  
STOTT: All I know is that it's in Eden somewhere. I've been searching all this
time. No result.  
DOCTOR: Then we've got to get the dimension projection sealed off again, which
means doing what we first came to do.  
STOTT: And what's that?  
DOCTOR: Separate the ships. Tell me, if we go out of the projection in that
direction, do we come to the power unit?  
STOTT: Yes, you can get out of the projection any way you want.  
DOCTOR: Good, good. Then that's what we'll do. Come on. Well, come on.  
(Stott turns the lights out and shuts the door after himself.)

**[Outside the Power unit]**

(K9 is there when Stott walks through the wall.)  
K9: Identify.  
(The Doctor and Romana come out.)  
STOTT: Look out, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: It's all right, he's mine.  
STOTT: What is it?  
DOCTOR: It's just a perfectly ordinary electric dog.  
K9: Master, I have located the power unit.  
DOCTOR: Good, good. Now listen, K9. This is Stott. He's a friend. All right?  
K9: Affirmative.  
DOCTOR: Good. Let's get to work. (Stott and K9 stand guard.)

**[Power unit]**

DOCTOR: Liquid hydrogen, turbopump exhaust, reactor core, pressure shell.
Right.  
ROMANA: Doctor, do you really know how to get this thing going?  
DOCTOR: Of course I do. I can start anything from a steam engine to a Tardis.
Have you got a match?  
ROMANA: What for?  
DOCTOR: I want to jam this switch down.  
ROMANA: Would a toothpick do?  
(The one in the Doctor's mouth.)  
DOCTOR: Perfect.  
K9: Master, during your absence I encountered alien creatures in this area.  
ROMANA: Mandrels, K9.  
K9: Name noted, mistress.  
DOCTOR: You'd better guard the door, K9. How many were there?  
K9: Five units, master.  
DOCTOR: Five! I'd better get a move on or they'll be all over the ship.  
ROMANA: Hadn't we better deal with them first?  
DOCTOR: No, no, no. Until the ships are separated and the projection is
stabilised, it'd be like trying to bail out a small boat with a  
ROMANA: Sieve?  
DOCTOR: Yes.

**[Passenger corridor, by the lift]**

ATTENDANT: We're doing everything we can. The skipper's got  
WOMAN 2: We should have been on Azure hours ago. My passengers asked me to
represent them, to take our complaint to the Captain.  
ATTENDANT: You must understand, he's very busy in the emergency. He's doing
everything possible to get you to Azure.  
(The flight attendant presses the lift button. The doors open and a mandrel
pounces on the woman. A second one gets him as he sounds the alarm.)

**[Empress bridge]**

(Rigg laughs at the scenes of carnage on the monitor, as mandrels attack the
helpless passengers.)  
COSTA: What's going on, Captain?  
RIGG: Nothing much, nothing much.  
COSTA: What's happening? What are those things?  
RIGG: They're a sort of judgment on us all.  
COSTA: What? I'll have you shot for this, Captain.  
(He uses the intercom.)  
COSTA: Bridge here. Emergency. The passengers on pallet sixty seven are under
attack. All armed crewmembers proceed to pallet sixty seven immediately! (to
Rigg) I shall be charging you with gross neglect of duty. The passengers
should be your first concern, yet I find you drunkenly looking on as they are
attacked and killed! Well?  
RIGG: They're only economy class. What's all the fuss about?

**[Power unit]**

(The Doctor is working inside a control unit.)  
DOCTOR: Is that the one, Romana? Romana, was that  
ROMANA: Mandrel!  
DOCTOR: K9!  
(The mandrel grabs the Doctor in a bear hug.)  
DOCTOR: K9, quickly!  
(K9 shoots the mandrel and it falls.)  
STOTT: Doctor, they're coming from both ways.  
DOCTOR: I've got to get this finished. Romana, did you check the cable to the
reactor?  
ROMANA: Yes, I'm pretty sure it was that one.  
DOCTOR: Well, check it. I need to be absolutely sure.  
(She hesitates at the mandrel. The Doctor kicks it.)  
DOCTOR: It's perfectly all right. It's quite dead.  
ROMANA: If you say so.  
(She jumps over the body.)  
DOCTOR: Was it the one?  
ROMANA: No, sorry. It's the one below.  
DOCTOR: It's a good thing you checked. I could have caused a spectacular
explosion.  
ROMANA: All ready to go now?  
DOCTOR: Nearly. Two things. One, I need to know whether the power on the
bridge is on maximum. Two, the demat has to be switched on from the Tardis at
exactly the same time I switch on this old gas oven. All right?  
ROMANA: All right.  
DOCTOR: Good.

**[Bridge]**

FISK: Captain, this ship is a disaster area. I'm placing you under arrest for
gross neglect of duty.  
(Costa twists Rigg's arm behind his back.)  
RIGG: Hey, it's really nice being arrested.  
(Costa takes Rigg out.)  
FISK: Now, about the, er, mandrels?  
TRYST: Yes.  
FISK: Mandrels. We need to seal them off and then destroy them. I'll send for
heavy weapons.  
TRYST: I'd rather if they're not killed, if that's possible.  
FISK: The things are killing our people, man. What do you suggest?  
TRYST: Some sort of tranquillising drug?  
FISK: We haven't got time for pussyfooting around! I can't think why you care
so much about such ugly, disgusting things.  
TRYST: It's all a matter of conservation. If they are killed, the whole
species will have gone.  
FISK: Look, I'm in charge here. I'll do what I think is best.  
CREWMAN [on monitor]: Level B. Two mandrels have got into the fuel section.  
FISK: Then kill them.  
CREWMAN [on monitor]: Well, we're worried about hitting the fuel tanks if we
fire.  
FISK: You see what I mean, Tryst? Keep them under surveillance, and if they
move out of there, destroy them.  
CREWMAN [on monitor]: Aye, aye, sir.  
FISK: Has the Doctor been seen in that sector?  
CREWMAN [on monitor]: No, sir.  
FISK: Yes, well, pass the word around that if he offers the slightest
resistance to arrest, shoot him.  
CREWMAN [on monitor]: Shoot him, sir?  
FISK: He's a criminal, isn't he? What else do you do with criminals?  
CREWMAN [on monitor]: Sir.

**[Power unit]**

DOCTOR: Stott, I want you and Romana to go back through the jungle. K9, I want
you to go back the way you came.  
K9: Negative, master. Blurred zone still operative. These zones are matter
interfaces.  
DOCTOR: Will you listen to me, please? Stott and I came through one. It's
perfectly all right if it's on the edge of a hull. All you need is a little
determination.  
K9: Affirmative. Determination, master.  
DOCTOR: Good. Now, when you get through, I want you to go back to the demat
machine set up near the Tardis, and when I whistle, you switch it on. Right?  
K9: Affirmative.  
DOCTOR: Good.  
ROMANA: What about you? You're not going to be here when the power unit comes
on, are you?  
DOCTOR: No, no. I'm going to rig myself a little time device. Could I borrow
your watch, please?  
(The Doctor takes the timepiece from Stott's wrist.)  
STOTT: Certainly.  
DOCTOR: Good. Is that on ship's time? Right. Now, I'll give you till 20:25 to
reach the bridge and put the power on. I'll set my device so I can escape in
good time.  
ROMANA: What about the mandrels? You won't have K9 or a gun.  
DOCTOR: I'll have to use my wits. Off you go. Take care. Look out for
excisemen. I don't think they like us very much. Off you go then.  
(Stott, Romana and K9 leave.)  
DOCTOR: Twenty oh one.

**[By the lift]**

(Fisk has assembled all four of the ship's crew to give them his orders.)  
FISK: I want this ship searched from top to bottom. If you see the Doctor or
his lady companion, arrest them. If they resist, kill them. Right, get on with
it.  
(Fisk gets into the lift.)

**[By the airlock]**

DYMOND: Shall I put it on destruct?  
TRYST: I think not. We'll see how things develop. We'll keep in touch.

**[Eden]**

(Roar!)  
ROMANA: Look out!  
(Stott shoots at the mandrel, making it stagger just enough for them to run
past and away. Then it collapses.)

**[Power unit]**

(The Doctor has taken Stott's watch apart and is putting pieces into the
control unit. Behind him, the 'dead' mandrel stirs. The time is 20:16.)  
DOCTOR: Plenty of time.  
(The Doctor bends down for a piece of equipment just as the mandrel takes a
swipe at him.  
(K9 enters the interface.)

**[Eden]**

ROMANA: You go back and guide the Doctor through.  
STOTT: What about the excisemen?  
ROMANA: I'll manage.  
STOTT: Right.  
(Stott turns back. Romana runs out of the projection and through the lounge.

**[Power unit]**

(The Doctor slips through a gap between two control units which is too small
for the mandrel to follow. He goes back behind the units to where he was
working, gives it a final blast of sonic screwdriver then switches on the
countdown. The ticking attracts the mandrel.)  
DOCTOR: No! No!  
(The mandrel smashes the annoying timer. The flash and bang finally kills it.
The Doctor stares as the creature crumbles into a heap of steaming powder.)  
DOCTOR: Vraxoin. Of course! So that's it.

**[First class corridor]**

(Romana ducks out of sight into a cloakroom when she hears voices
approaching.)  
COSTA: How much longer do we have to stay up here?  
FISK: Until the job's finished. How many casualties so far?  
COSTA: Here's the list. Twelve dead, twenty nine injured. Enough for a small
war.  
FISK: You know what this means?  
(Costa uses a drinks dispenser in the wall opposite the cloakroom.)  
COSTA: What?  
FISK: Almost certain promotion.  
COSTA: Promotion?  
FISK: It's bound to be, a situation as big as this. It'll sort itself out and
in the end we'll have two tailor-made suspects, the Doctor and the girl. We'll
be the golden boys of the day.  
COSTA: We don't actually know anything about those two.  
FISK: You found the traces of Vrax in the Doctor's pocket. What more do you
want?  
(Fisk and Costa move off towards the lounge. Romana comes out of hiding and
heads carefully for the bridge.)

**[By the Tardis]**

(Everything is as the Doctor left it, with the Tardis door wide open.)  
K9: In position. Waiting.

**[Power unit]**

(The Doctor is trying to repair the damage to the controls that the mandrel
caused.)  
DOCTOR: Twenty twenty-one? I'll never do it.

**[Empress bridge]**

(Rigg is there, and coming down from his high with a crash.)  
ROMANA: The Doctor's got into the power unit.  
RIGG: Good, good.  
ROMANA: We're going to separate the ships now.  
RIGG: Have you got something for me? Something I need?  
ROMANA: I must put full power on. Please, let me pass, Captain.  
RIGG: I must have something for this terrible feeling, don't you understand?  
ROMANA: I haven't got anything.  
RIGG: You're lying. I know you've got the stuff, now tell me where it is.  
ROMANA: Please, let me just set the controls and I'll help you. Now let me go.  
RIGG: I don't care about the stupid ship, woman. I want something for this
feeling! Now you can help me. Please, I'll give you money. I've got money. How
much? How much?  
ROMANA: Let me just get the ship operating, and then I'll see that you get
medical help.  
RIGG: Just a little bit. I know you've got it. Now let me have some or I'll
kill you!  
ROMANA: I haven't got anything!  
(Rigg tries to hit her. She ducks under his arm and runs for the control
console. He grabs her wrist as she reaches for the button. 20:23. The Doctor
is sweating as he works.)  
RIGG: Give it to me!  
(Fisk shoots Rigg.)  
ROMANA: Oh, thank you. He was going to kill me.  
FISK: Well it wouldn't have mattered much, since you're going to die anyway.
Trafficking in drugs is punishable by death on Azure.  
ROMANA: Whereas bureaucratic murder is rewarded with promotion.  
FISK: I didn't invent the rules, I just enforce them. Don't touch those
controls.  
ROMANA: But you don't understand. The Doctor is in the power unit. We're going
to separate the ships now. I must operate the drive.  
FISK: I don't know what you're up to, but I intend to stop you. Touch those
controls and I shoot!  
ROMANA: I thought you were going to kill me anyway.  
FISK: Don't touch them!  
(20:24. The Doctor has finished and put the toothpick in place. He blows his
dog whistle. K9 switches on the demat machine which sends a beam into the
blurred area. 20:25. Romana hits the power control. Everything shimmers and
the Doctor runs out of the Power unit into a blurred area, and disappears.)

__**Part Four**__

**[Empress bridge]**

(The two ships are separated. Romana picks herself up from the floor. Fisk is
still down, so she kicks his gun out of his hand and runs out. Fisk is about
to follow when - )  
DYMOND [on monitor]: He's done it! Empress, this is Hecate. Full separation
has been achieved. No damage to report. Empress, this is Hecate. Respond
please.  
FISK: I read you, Dymond. What are you doing on your ship?  
DYMOND [on monitor]: I came aboard to get a couple of GP guns to help against
the mandrels. The ships separated whilst I was here.  
FISK: Yeah, right. I'll check the Empress for damage.  
(He punches a row of buttons.)  
FISK: Good as new.  
DYMOND [on monitor]: Waterguard Fisk, sir. I request your permission to
continue my journey. I will not be pressing any claim on the Empress.  
FISK: No, no, no, no. I might need you as a witness. There's bound to be an
enquiry.  
DYMOND [on monitor]: But if I delay my departure for even an hour I'll lose my
contract!  
FISK: Look, Dymond, I haven't raised this with you before, but now I'm telling
you officially. When this accident occurred, you, as Rigg rightly pointed out,
was in a prohibited area. Now that makes you liable to at least a considerable
fine. Now, if you try to get away, I'll nail a writ to your bulkhead! Do you
understand, Dymond?  
DYMOND [on monitor]: Yes.  
FISK: Right. Come back aboard as quick as you can.  
DYMOND [on monitor]: Yes, right away.

**[By the Tardis]**

K9: Operation one hundred percent successful, mistress.  
ROMANA: Yes, I know, but I can't find the Doctor. Can you locate him, K9?  
K9: Affirmative. Sensors indicate that the master is not aboard the ship,
mistress.  
ROMANA: What!  
(The Doctor is lying unconscious in a dark room.)

**[Sickbay]**

(An injured passenger is wheeled into the room opposite the Tardis. Romana
enters.)  
ROMANA: Della, have you seen the Doctor?  
DELLA: No, I've been too busy with the casualties. The Excisemen want him shot
on sight, and you.  
ROMANA: Yes, I know. I wonder, could you bare to talk about Stott?  
DELLA: Why?  
ROMANA: Well, Tryst told us that you and he might be implicated in the drug
smuggling. Now, we know it's not you and Stott, but it would help if you could
tell me what happened.  
DELLA: All right. Stott and I were together. He was acting very strangely. He
kept telling me to go back to the shuttle. I could see he was worried. There
were mandrels prowling about, but I know it wasn't that. He was looking for
someone.  
ROMANA: For whom? Did he say?  
DELLA: No. Then it happened. A shot came from the forest. He was only stunned,
but a mandrel came out from behind. I ran. I ran. I couldn't help myself, I
just ran. I was so afraid.  
ROMANA: It's all right, Della. Anyone would have done the same.  
DELLA: The mandrel killed him.  
ROMANA: How do you know?  
DELLA: Tryst told me. He showed me a visprint. It was horrible.  
ROMANA: Stott didn't die. He's here on this ship.  
DELLA: What? He can't  
ROMANA: He is.  
DELLA: But where? I must see him.  
ROMANA: Not yet. Now, we must find out who is smuggling the Vraxoin. We know
it's something to do with the Eden projection. Stott may be able to help us.  
DELLA: I knew it was him looking at me. In the Eden picture, someone staring
out, only I couldn't believe it. I thought I was seeing a ghost. Romana, what
can I do to help?  
ROMANA: First of all, we'd better find the Doctor.

**[Hecate]**

(The Doctor wakes up. The first thing he inspects is a wicked looking free
standing laser-like device.)  
DOCTOR: How very odd. How very strange.  
(He looks out of the porthole to see the Empress a short distance away.)  
DOCTOR: How very clever.  
(He hides as Dymond enters. Dymond uses a small keyboard, smiles at the
results on the screen, and leaves again. The Doctor crawls over and calls up
the results again. Eden Project: projected turnover Gal Credits: z13,000,000.
Overheads z3,900,000. Profit margin: 9,100,000.)  
DOCTOR: The profits on human suffering.  
(The Doctor leaves that room, and ducks behind a bank of equipment as Dymond
goes past. He tiptoes through the airlock where Dymond is suiting up again,
and gets into the back of the shuttle. Dymond gets in and plugs his helmet
into the shuttle air supply. The Doctor puts himself into suspended animation.
The shuttlebay doors open and Dymond flies back to the Empress, as promised to
Fisk.)

**[Empress bridge]**

FISK: Right. Dymond's on his way. Now, any sign of the Doctor?  
COSTA: No. They're searching A deck at the moment.  
TRYST: I think I know where the Doctor went.  
FISK: Where? Why didn't you say so before?  
TRYST: You may find it hard to believe.  
FISK: Make me believe, professor.  
TRYST: I think he went into the projection.  
FISK: What projection?  
TRYST: The CET machine. The image has become an unstable dimensional field.  
FISK: Oh. If he went into it, he's got to come out the same way. Costa, check
the guard on the lounge.  
COSTA: Right.  
FISK: I'll join you later.  
(Costa leaves.)  
FISK: Tryst, what would the Doctor want inside the projection?  
TRYST: I can only imagine that one of the crew of my expedition found a new
source of this er, what is this thing called?  
FISK: Vrax.  
TRYST: Ja, Vrax. Yes, Vrax, and placed it in the transmute location. Yes, then
he informed the Doctor. So the Doctor comes on board and makes the pick-up,
which fits in with your own wonderful theory, does it not?  
FISK: Yes, yes. Only, why did he bother to separate the ships?  
TRYST: Perhaps it's because, as you say, he is a criminal.  
FISK: That would be it.

**[By the Tardis]**

(Della comes running up.)  
ROMANA: Did you find anything?  
DELLA: Only a mandrel.  
ROMANA: Oh, he must be somewhere.  
K9: Negative, mistress. I have scanned the ship and I detect no  
(K9's 'ears' whirr.)  
ROMANA: What is it, K9?  
K9: This way. The Doctor has just come aboard.

**[Outside the airlock]**

(Dymond's shuttle has docked, and Dymond heads for the lift. Romana, K9 and
Della hide round the corner.)  
DOCTOR: Hello, K9.  
ROMANA: Hello, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Hello, Romana. Everything all right?  
ROMANA: What happened to you?  
DOCTOR: I got caught in the interface when the two ships separated. Hello,
Della.  
(The lift arrives.)  
DOCTOR: Look out! Quick!  
(Two armed crewmen are there. One catches Della but the other is stunned by K9
as the Doctor and Romana duck into the stairwell. K9 leaves. The crewman
checks on his fallen colleague then returns to Della.)  
CREWMAN: What were you doing with them?  
DELLA: Finding out a few things.  
CREWMAN: Well, you'd better tell Fisk about it. Come on.  
(The Doctor and Romana return.)  
DOCTOR: Bit uncivil of them, pointing their guns at us like that.  
ROMANA: They've had orders to shoot.  
DOCTOR: Yes. Tell me, what would you use an inchuka laser for?  
ROMANA: An inchuka laser can be used to carry thousands of telecom messages  
DOCTOR: Shush. Could it carry a CET projection crystal?  
ROMANA: From what I've seen of Tryst's set up, I should think so. Why?  
DOCTOR: Because Dymond's got a CET projection machine aboard the Hecate with
an inchuka laser attached.  
ROMANA: Then Tryst and Dymond are the smugglers?  
DOCTOR: It looks like it. The only way of convincing Fisk is to catch them in
the act of transferring the Vraxoin.  
K9: Master, detect units approaching.  
(It is Stott, backing away as he fires at a mandrel.)  
DOCTOR: Stott, leave it to K9!  
(K9 zaps the creature to the floor.)  
STOTT: What happened to you, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Never mind about us. We know who the smugglers are.  
STOTT: Who?  
DOCTOR: Dymond's the pick-up man, and the smuggler's Tryst himself.  
STOTT: Tryst?  
DOCTOR: Yes. The Vraxoin's kept on the Eden crystal. They're about to transfer
that crystal to the Hecate.  
STOTT: Do you know what the source is?  
ROMANA: Yes. Those things.  
STOTT: The mandrels?  
DOCTOR: Yes. One of them attacked me in the Power unit. Poor thing was
electrocuted, burnt to a powder.  
STOTT: A powder? You mean?  
DOCTOR: Vraxoin.  
STOTT: No wonder I couldn't find it.  
DOCTOR: Yes. They can make the transference across space by means of the
inchuka laser.  
STOTT: Can you prove it?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
STOTT: How?  
DOCTOR: I let them do it.

**[Empress bridge]**

(Della's crewman escort is grabbed by a mandrel out in the corridor. She
screams and runs into the bridge where Tryst is putting on a spacesuit like
Dymond's.)  
DELLA: Tryst, there's a mandrel out there!  
TRYST: It's all right, Della. Dymond has a gun.  
DELLA: What are you doing, Tryst? You weren't thinking of leaving the ship,
were you? You've got to help the Doctor. You knew the CET was unstable so it's
all your fault. You must help them get the mandrels back into the projection.  
TRYST: Is that what he's doing?  
DELLA: Yes!  
TRYST: Good. In that case, I'm right behind him.

**[Lounge]**

(The Doctor is examining the CET machine when Costa and two crewmen burst
through the main door, and Fisk in from the washroom with anther two. The Eden
projection is running.)  
FISK: Put your hands up, Doctor!  
DOCTOR: You're arresting the wrong man, you know, Fisk.  
FISK: That's enough, Doctor.  
STOTT: Stop!  
(Stott runs out of the projection.  
FISK: Who are you? Keep your hands up!  
(Fisk takes Stott's proffered ID.)  
STOTT: It's Tryst and Dymond you want.

**[Empress bridge]**

DELLA: Tryst, did you know Stott was alive?  
TRYST: Alive? He can't be!  
DELLA: You fired that shot, didn't you, that last day on Eden.  
TRYST: I didn't want to, Della. He forced the situation on himself.  
DELLA: You! You're smuggling the Vrax.  
TRYST: Della, I, er  
DELLA: Yes is the word you're looking for.  
TRYST: No, it started just as a little thing, just to help me over a slight
financial difficulty. The cost of the expedition, that was bankrupting me!  
DELLA: But Vrax is destroying people by the millions!  
TRYST: I had to continue my research! Without me, many of those creatures
would have become extinct!  
DELLA: I think a few million people becoming extinct is rather more serious.  
TRYST: Ah, but they had a choice. It was their own fault that they became
addicted.  
DELLA: Huh! Like Rigg, I suppose. Did he have a choice or was he tricked?  
TRYST: That was unfortunate.  
DYMOND: But necessary.  
(A mandrel enters. Della escapes.)  
TRYST: No, don't kill him! He's valuable!  
DYMOND: Tryst, I can't even stop it!  
(Finally the mandrel collapses.)  
TRYST: Della! Get after her.  
(Dymond runs out. Tryst shoots the main ship's control console and follows.)

**[First class corridor]**

(Della arrives at the body of the crewman. The mandrel is still there in a
doorway. Dymond comes up from behind and shoots Della, then K9 and Romana come
round the corner.)  
ROMANA: Stop him, K9, quickly!  
(Romana goes to help Della and K9 goes round the next corner.)  
K9: Mission aborted, mistress.  
(The mandrel comes out of the doorway and threatens Romana. K9 shoots it.)  
K9: More important to protect you as programmed, mistress.  
ROMANA: Thank you, K9. That was close.  
K9: Two metres, to be precise, mistress.  
(The Doctor comes running up.)  
DOCTOR: Romana, what happened?  
ROMANA: Dymond shot Della. She's wounded, but she'll be all right.  
DOCTOR: The callous wretches. They'll be making the transfer to the Hecate by
now.

**[Outside the shuttlebay]**

FISK [OC]: All personnel locate and apprehend passenger Tryst and pilot
Dymond. They may try to leave the ship. And with reference to the previous
order regarding the Doctor, cancel it.  
TRYST: Is sooner than I thought.  
DYMOND: Better move. They'll have an interceptor after us.  
TRYST: I think not. I smashed the communications system. They're cut off from
Azure.

**[Empress bridge]**

FISK: If we don't get them on the ship, we've lost them.  
STOTT: The Empress is faster, isn't she?  
FISK: There's no pilot, no navigating officer. Could you fly her?  
(Stott shakes his head. The Doctor enters.)  
DOCTOR: Gentlemen, once more into the  
(Then he sees the destroyed communication unit.)  
DOCTOR: What happened?  
STOTT: Tryst and Dymond have got away.  
DOCTOR: They won't go anywhere without the Eden crystal. That gives us a
little time.  
FISK: To do what?  
DOCTOR: Well, now that the ships are separated, we can at last stabilise the
CET properly.  
FISK: Good. Isn't it?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
FISK: Yes, but what does it mean?  
DOCTOR: It means, Fisk, that we can finally clear this marauding menagerie
back into the projection, which is exactly where Dymond will want it.  
FISK: Yes. But what are we going to do?  
DOCTOR: Give him what he wants. We have to bait the hook properly, don't we?

**[Corridor]**

(Stott and a crewman use their weapons to herd a pair of mandrels along.)  
STOTT: Keep them moving. We should meet up with Fisk soon.  
(Fisk, Costa and a crewman have got three more, but the crewman gets knocked
out before they can get them moving again.  
Meanwhile, Dymond's shuttle arrives back on the Hecate.)

**[First class corridor]**

(The two groups have met up and are nearly at the lounge.)  
STOTT: The guns are fading!  
(The mandrels turn and start to drive the men back. The Doctor appears and
whistles to get the mandrel's attention. Then he uses the dog whistle to calm
them and lure them into the lounge. Very Pied Piper of him.)

**[Lounge]**

(He gets them to the edge of the Eden projection.)  
DOCTOR: I'm going inside now and I may be rather a long time.  
(Blowing the whistle, he leads the mandrels back into Eden.)

**[Eden]**

(The Doctor tries to circle round and get out again, but trips on a vine.)  
DOCTOR: Ah. Oh gosh, oh lord, oh Doctor.  
(He leads them out of camera shot.)  
DOCTOR [OC]: Steady, steady. This way. Not that way! This. Oh! Oh!  
(Bits of foliage come flying into shot.)  
DOCTOR [OC]: Oh, my fingers, my arms, my legs! Ah! My everything! Argh!

**[Lounge]**

(Fisk and Costa put away their guns.)  
FISK: It's all over, then. Switch off the machine.  
ROMANA: No!  
(The Doctor appears from the. His coat has been ripped to shreds with just the
lining left and the arms hanging off his wrists. A mandrel appears behind him
and he runs out.)  
DOCTOR: Quick, switch it off!  
(Romana switches off the CET machine.)  
DOCTOR: Phew. Well done, Romana.  
FISK: Well, Doctor?  
STOTT: What now?  
(The Doctor takes his own pulse.)  
DOCTOR: Romana, you've got two minutes fifty eight seconds to rebuild this
machine.  
ROMANA: What, this?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
ROMANA: CET?  
DOCTOR: Yes!  
ROMANA: Are you joking?  
DOCTOR: Do I look as if I'm joking? Well?  
ROMANA: Well, I'll need a screwdriver.

**[Hecate]**

(Tryst is lining up the laser when Dymond enters.)  
DYMOND: How's the attitude setting?  
TRYST: It couldn't be better. Are you ready to get us out of here as soon as
I've made the transfer?  
DYMOND: I can fire the engine from here.  
TRYST: Good. I'm ready.  
(Tryst switches on the laser.)

**[Lounge]**

DOCTOR: Increase the gain on the matrix modulator. Well?  
ROMANA: Up five points.  
DOCTOR: Five points. That's not enough. We're going to need some more power
from somewhere.  
ROMANA: We could put the jump leads on K9.  
DOCTOR: Good.  
(He just happens to have them around his neck. Romana clips them onto K9's
'ears'.)  
DOCTOR: Good dog, K9. Come on, put your leads on. Put your leads on. There.  
ROMANA: Are you connected, K9?  
K9: Affirmative, mistress.  
STOTT: What are you hoping to achieve?  
DOCTOR: I want to increase the range and power of this machine. How many
points now, Romana?  
ROMANA: Ten and building.  
DOCTOR: Ten and building. That's much better. We're going to be all right.  
(Then the laser beam hits the top of the machine where the Doctor is resting
his hands. He jumps.)  
ROMANA: Are you all right?  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes. It was just a little shock, that's all.  
ROMANA: They're making the transfer.  
STOTT: That means they'll get away.  
DOCTOR: Shush! Quiet, quiet. Reverse the setting on the transmutation reflex.
It's all right, it's all right, it's quite safe.  
ROMANA: They've made the transfer.  
DOCTOR: So?  
ROMANA: They'll get away!  
DOCTOR: Will you please reverse the setting on the transmutation reflex!  
(Romana sticks the sonic screwdriver inside the CET.)  
DOCTOR: K9?  
K9: Yes, master?  
DOCTOR: I want you to find the Hecate. Give me her position.  
K9: Affirmative.  
DOCTOR: Good dog.

**[Hecate]**

TRYST: Good. We've done it. Let's get out of here.  
(Dymond fires up the Hecate's engines and she starts moving away.)

**[Lounge]**

K9: Forty seven point three, vector seven niner niner in seven seconds.  
DOCTOR: Forty seven point three vector seven niner niner. I hope you're right,
K9.  
(As the Doctor operates the CET machine, everything shimmers briefly.)  
DOCTOR: Well, good.  
STOTT: What's happened?  
DOCTOR: Have you ever heard the expression, hoist by his own petard?  
STOTT: Yes, but you haven't done anything.  
DOCTOR: Good, well what  
(The Excisemen enter.)  
FISK: So, Doctor, your plan has failed miserably. There's no way we can catch
them now.  
DOCTOR: On the contrary, Fisk. I've already caught them. There they are, all
yours.  
(On the projection screen, Tryst and Dymond stare at them in horror.)  
FISK: But I, I  
DOCTOR: All I did was increase the range of this machine and brought them
back. Matter transmutation, you see. And because the projection's still
unstable, all you have to do is pluck them out.  
FISK: You heard him. Pluck them out.  
(Two crewmen fetch Tryst and Dymond out of the projection.)  
TRYST: Doctor! Doctor, I didn't want to be involved in all this. Tell them.
Tell them that I only did it for the sake of funding my research. You
understand all this. You're a scientist.  
DOCTOR: Go away.  
TRYST: What?  
DOCTOR: Go away.  
TRYST: Oh!

**[Outside the Tardis]**

DOCTOR: Well, how are you now, Della? Good? Good?  
DELLA: I'm fine now, thank you, Doctor. I'm relieved the nightmare's over.  
DOCTOR: The nightmare's here, on the Eden crystal.  
ROMANA: And here's the rest of Tryst's electric zoo.  
DELLA: It never was meant to be a zoo. It really was a conservation exercise
for most of us.  
DOCTOR: I think the best way of conserving the poor creatures trapped in these
crystals is to project them back to their own planets, don't you?  
DELLA: But you've dismantled the CET.  
ROMANA: Oh, we've got far more sophisticated stuff in the Tardis. Do it in no
time.  
STOTT: What about the mandrels and the Vraxoin?  
DOCTOR: The mandrels have a perfect right to exist. In one way Tryst was
right. Humans do have some kind of choice. Let's just hope that no one else
discovers the secret.  
ROMANA: I can only think of one animal who'd be comfortably at home in an
electric zoo.  
DELLA: Really? What's that?  
ROMANA: I don't think we want to tell them, do we, K9?  
K9: Negative, mistress.  
  
---  
  
<Back to the episode listing

Doctor Who and related marks are trademarks of BBC . Copyright  1963,
Present. The web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment
purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

