

**Logopolis**  
  
Original Airdate: 28 Feb, 1981  

__**Part One**__

**[Barnet lay-by]**

(On Earth, in a rural part of the London Borough of Barnet, a genuine
policeman is using a genuine blue police box to telephone the station. His
words are muffled by the nearby traffic noises. He has propped his bicycle up
against the box and is just dropping his rubbish in a nearby bin when the
police box whibbles, and his connection is interrupted. It sounds as if a
Tardis has just materialised in the police box. As the policeman tries to re-
establish communications, the door opens and he is dragged inside. There is
the sound of evil laughter.)

**[Cloister room]**

(The Doctor is pacing amongst the ivy-clad pillars of this inner part of the
Tardis.)  
ADRIC: Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Chameleon circuit.  
ADRIC: What? Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Look, whenever you see me in this part of the Tardis, pacing up and
down like this, be a good chap and don't interrupt me, will you, unless it's
terribly urgent. It's not terribly urgent, is it?  
ADRIC: Well, no.  
DOCTOR: Good, so now you'll know in fact there's no need for you to come
barging in here at all, but if it is terribly urgent you can always ring the
Cloister Bell.  
ADRIC: The Cloister Bell?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
ADRIC: What's that?  
DOCTOR: Well, it's a sort of communications device reserved for wild
catastrophes and sudden calls to man the battle stations.  
ADRIC: But the Tardis doesn't have battle stations.  
DOCTOR: No, no, no, nothing along those lines. I sometimes think I should be
running a tighter ship.  
ADRIC: A tighter ship?  
DOCTOR: Yes. The second law of thermodynamics is taking its toll on the old
thing. Entropy increases.  
ADRIC: Entropy increases?  
DOCTOR: Yes, daily. The more you put things together, the more they keep
falling apart, and that's the essence of the second law of thermodynamics and
I never heard a truer word spoken. Come on. Come on.  
(They sit on a small stone bench.)  
DOCTOR: Have you seen the state of the time column recently? Wheezing like a
grampus.  
ADRIC: But it will get us to Gallifrey, won't it?  
DOCTOR: Gallifrey? Oh yes, yes. Are you really set on going to Gallifrey?  
ADRIC: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Oh.  
ADRIC: That is where we're going, isn't it?  
DOCTOR: That's one of the questions I was just pondering. There's bound to be
an awful lot of fuss about Romana. Why she stayed in E-space, official
investigations, that sort of thing.  
ADRIC: The Time Lords won't approve?  
DOCTOR: What? She has broken the cardinal rule of Gallifrey. She has become
involved, and in a pretty permanent sort of way. I think that you and I should
let a few oceans flow under a few bridges before we head back home.  
ADRIC: So we don't get to go to Gallifrey.  
DOCTOR: Yes. Let me put another question to you. I have a place in mind that's
on the way, well, more or less, give or take a parsec or two. It's my home
from home. It's called Earth.

**[Battersea, London]**

(A young Australian woman in purple air stewardess uniform comes out of a
house on Ursula Street, then remembers something. Her aunt is waiting for her
in a tiny soft-top convertible car. Everyone say Hi to  Janet Fielding.)  
TEGAN: Passport.  
VANESSA: Oh, she's going to go back in there. Forget her head if it wasn't
screwed on, I tell you.  
(The little car refuses to start. Tegan comes back out of the house again and
gets into the car.)  
VANESSA: There we go.  
TEGAN: Okay, Aunty Vanessa, let's go. More choke. Easy on the throttle as you
turn her over.  
VANESSA: While I do that, dear, I wonder if you'd mind shutting the front
door.  
(The door to number 43 is standing ajar.)  
VANESSA: And don't forget your bag. You might need it.  
TEGAN: Rats. I promise I'll get organised one day.  
VANESSA: Now calm now, Tegan, dear. Look, we've got plenty of time. You get
yourself so excited.  
(Tegan runs back to the house as a plane passes overhead.)  
VANESSA: Wish you and I had half her energy, though.  
(Tegan returns with her bag, after finally remembering to close the door.)  
TEGAN: Sorry, Aunty. First flight nerves, I guess. Here, let me have a go.  
VANESSA: That's a good idea. I'm not having any luck here with it at all this
morning. It's really very cold.  
TEGAN: It's cold.  
(Tegan takes over the driver's seat.)  
VANESSA: There we are. Got all your things? Right.  
(Tegan turns the key and the engine starts first time.)  
TEGAN: I've got the knack.  
VANESSA: You sure have.  
TEGAN: Ladies and gentlemen. Although the fasten seatbelt sign is now off, we
suggest that you keep your seatbelt fastened when seated. If necessary, you
may move about the cabin. Smoking is now permitted.

**[Cloister room]**

ADRIC: Earth's the planet with all the oceans, isn't it?  
DOCTOR: That's the chap.  
ADRIC: Wet.  
DOCTOR: Britain is. That's the one place where we can find these blue boxes.  
ADRIC: Tardises?  
DOCTOR: Yes, but they're not. No spacious accommodation, no viewer screens.
They don't even time travel. Just elementary Earth communications devices, and
more or less obsolete by the time we'll be arriving there. There's some in the
North that are still in use.  
ADRIC: But we've got communications devices.  
DOCTOR: But not a police box.  
ADRIC: A police box?  
DOCTOR: Yes. What the mathematical model of a Tardis exterior is based upon.  
ADRIC: I'd like to see Earth, but why go all that way just to look at
something that looks like the Tardis?  
DOCTOR: Because I want to measure it.  
ADRIC: Whatever for?  
DOCTOR: Block transfer computation.  
ADRIC: I've never heard of that.  
DOCTOR: I'm not surprised. Logopolis is a quiet little planet.  
ADRIC: Logopolis? But I thought we were going to Earth?  
DOCTOR: No, that's the other place. We go to Logopolis afterwards.  
ADRIC: You mean we're going to measure Logopolis, too?  
DOCTOR: No, no, no. It's all to do with the chameleon circuit problem. We
measure the police box on Earth, then we take the measurements afterwards to
Logopolis. Come on, I'll show you.  
(A bell begins to toll.)  
ADRIC: What is it?  
DOCTOR: The Cloister Bell.

**[Barnet lay-by]**

(The brave little car has got a flat tyre. Tegan pulls into the lay-by with
the blue police box.)

**[Tardis corridor]**

ADRIC: It's stopped.  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
ADRIC: Well, what does it mean?  
DOCTOR: Well, nothing, when it's not ringing.  
ADRIC: But it did ring. Is there a wild catastrophe?  
DOCTOR: Apparently not.  
ADRIC: Well, something must have made it ring.  
DOCTOR: Yes, or else our old friend entropy's nibbling away at the system
circuitry. Let's take a look.  
ADRIC: But you were saying about the chameleon circuit.

**[Barnet lay-by]**

TEGAN: Hell's teeth, Aunty Vanessa. It is a flat.  
VANESSA: I thought there was something funny about that steering, but you
wouldn't listen to me.

**[Tardis corridor]**

DOCTOR: Well, it's only the exterior of a Tardis that exists as a real space-
time event.  
ADRIC: But mapped on to one of the interior continua.  
DOCTOR: Precisely. That's very good.  
ADRIC: So you can change it into anything you like.  
DOCTOR: Ah, well, that's a sore point. According to the handbook, yeah,
because the outer plasmic shell of a Tardis is driven by the chameleon
circuit, or so the theory runs. In practice I always meant to ask Romana to
help me fix it one day.  
(He opens the door to her room and they look in.)  
DOCTOR: Ah. I suppose we're going to miss Romana.  
ADRIC: And K9, too.  
DOCTOR: Yes. Still, the future lies this way.

**[Barnet lay-by]**

TEGAN: Come on, Aunty. We've got to do something.  
VANESSA: Yeah. Telephone for help.  
TEGAN: Absolutely not. Cars. I hate 'em.  
VANESSA: That's not what you said when I offered you a lift.  
TEGAN: Sorry, Aunty, but you just don't get this sort of silly aggravation
with aircraft.  
VANESSA: Well, perhaps if we sit here and look helpless, someone might offer
us a lift.  
TEGAN: Pathetic. We'll crack this ourselves. Now then.  
(Tegan looks in the boot.)  
TEGAN: Where's the wheel spanner?

**[Tardis]**

(The Doctor and Adric finally get back to the console room.)  
ADRIC: So the chameleon circuit's stuck?  
DOCTOR: Exactly.  
ADRIC: In Totter's Yard.  
DOCTOR: In a totter's yard. Anyway, it was ages ago. It doesn't matter. She
was in on Gallifrey for repair when I borrowed her.  
ADRIC: I thought she was yours?  
(The Doctor gets underneath the console.)  
DOCTOR: Well, on a sort of finders-keepers basis, yes. I should have waited
till they'd done the chameleon conversion, but there were other pressing
reasons at the time. Anything happening up there?  
ADRIC: No.  
(A panel pops open and a control board comes out.)  
ADRIC: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Good. Ah.  
ADRIC: What do these numbers and letters mean?  
DOCTOR: Well, it's an early version. The instructions have to be punched in by
machine code.  
ADRIC: Oh, how boring.  
DOCTOR: Boring? In theory we should be able to do things like this.  
(The Doctor hits a few keys and the scanner draws an outline of a pyramid.)  
DOCTOR: There. You have a door there.  
ADRIC: Yes, I suppose that's useful.  
DOCTOR: Well, we've got to be able to get in and out.  
ADRIC: No, no, I mean being able to change like that.  
DOCTOR: That's how the Master hid from us on Traken. Anyway, if this worked,
I'd just have to punch a few buttons like this, and we'd be a pyramid.  
(The scanner diagram becomes the familiar police box in space.)  
ADRIC: It's very distinctive.  
DOCTOR: Yes. I'm not sure we should be distinctive.  
ADRIC: Why? Who's looking for us now? You've disposed of the Master.  
DOCTOR: Yes. But since we left Traken, and then the Cloister Bell.  
ADRIC: Wild catastrophe?  
DOCTOR: Mmm.  
ADRIC: Man the battle stations?  
DOCTOR: Yes. Ah, Earth. Nearly there.

**[Barnet lay-by]**

(Vanessa is reading from the car's handbook while Tegan does the manual
labour.)  
VANESSA: Completely remove the wheel-nuts, remove the hub trim, exchange the
road wheels and replace the hub trim and wheel-nuts. Oh, dear.  
(Tegan is still struggling with one wheel nut when she looks up to see an
aeroplane passing overhead.)  
TEGAN: Now that's what I call travelling.  
VANESSA: You and your aeroplanes. I sometimes think you should have been born
with wings.  
(Clang!)  
TEGAN: Oh, rabbits.  
(The Tardis materialises unnoticed on the lay-by, near the real police box.)  
VANESSA: By the way, dear, don't you think you should put a jack underneath
there before you take that wheel off?

**[Tardis]**

DOCTOR: We've missed.  
ADRIC: What's supposed to happen?  
DOCTOR: At least, I suppose it's a miss, but I thought just for once we'd
materialise on the right coordinates.  
(The scanner shows the edge of the real police box and the two women
struggling with the car wheel.)  
DOCTOR: Two point six metres off target. What a landing.  
ADRIC: It's not bad for the Tardis.  
DOCTOR: That's what I just said. What a landing. No, no, no, no. Don't open
the door.  
ADRIC: Aren't we going out there to measure it?  
DOCTOR: There's no need to draw attention to ourselves. There's a simpler way,
if I can just organise it. The Tardis and I are getting rather better at these
short hops.  
(The policeman's bicycle falls over as the Tardis materialises around the
police box.)  
ADRIC: It's just like the Tardis!  
DOCTOR: I hope not. That could produce some unpleasant dimensional anomalies.
No, it's just an ordinary police box, around which we've materialised with
considerable finesse, I hope you've noticed.  
ADRIC: Police telephone, free for use of  
DOCTOR: No, no, no, leave it alone.  
(The Doctor puts the telephone back on it's cradle.)  
DOCTOR: It's a communications device. Adric, take down these dimensions. I've
been meaning to do this for centuries.

**[Barnet lay-by]**

(Tegan gets the spare wheel from the boot.)  
VANESSA: It's nearly done.  
TEGAN: I don't really belong at ground level, Aunt Vanessa.  
VANESSA: Yeah.  
TEGAN: I didn't mean to be rude about your car. It's very nice of you to give
me a lift to the airport.  
VANESSA: My little runabout's used to being insulted by now.  
(Across the road, a white figure watches from behind the fence.)  
TEGAN: Cars are all right, I guess. Just more fun to have your own plane back
home. What kind of a maintenance schedule are you running here, Aunty Vanessa?
This tyre's flat, too.

**[Tardis]**

DOCTOR: Three point six seven metres normal to the back surface.  
ADRIC: How much more of this is there?  
DOCTOR: It has to be measured in every dimension.  
ADRIC: But it can't have thirty seven dimensions! You said it was an ordinary
Earth object.  
DOCTOR: In every dimension. I need every detail. The Logopolitans convert that
into a precise mathematical model.  
ADRIC: Why?  
DOCTOR: Well, to overlay it on the Tardis.  
ADRIC: And that's block transfer computation.  
DOCTOR: Well, it's a way of modelling space-time events through pure
calculation.  
ADRIC: Really?  
DOCTOR: No, transcendentally. It's quite hard to explain in a word.  
ADRIC: Creating solid objects through pure mathematics.  
DOCTOR: Yes. I meant to do it all of course when they first offered to do the
chameleon conversion for me. It's highly specialised. But they say it'll work.
Leg up.

**[Barnet lay-by]**

(The mysterious Watcher sees Vanessa trying to pump up the flat spare tyre.)  
VANESSA: Oh, please, dear, do let's get a man from the garage.  
TEGAN: No way. The stories I've heard about the way they exploit helpless
women. You want the job done well, you do it yourself, that's what Dad used to
say.  
VANESSA: Perhaps some knight errant will stop for us.  
TEGAN: You have to learn to fend for yourself in the outback, you know.  
VANESSA: Your father's farm is hardly the outback, my dear, and neither is
this. You know, I can see a garage not even a quarter of a mile away.  
TEGAN: Industry and application, Aunt Vanessa. Air stewardesses are supposed
to be resourceful.  
VANESSA: You're not an air stewardess yes, dear.  
TEGAN: I will be after today.  
VANESSA: If ever we get to the airport.  
TEGAN: We will, just as soon as I get this wheel off.  
VANESSA: Oh, god. You know, I thought I saw a man hovering over there. Perhaps
he needed a wave of encouragement.  
TEGAN: It's the 1980s, Aunt Vanessa. No knight errants.

**[Tardis]**

(Adric is on his stomach on top of the police box.)  
ADRIC: So why do we have to go to Logopolis if the theory's as simple as you
say?  
DOCTOR: Because the actual working-out's incredibly tedious. Lots of fiddly
computations. Much better to leave it to the Logopolitans. They do it standing
on their heads.  
ADRIC: Not with a computer?  
DOCTOR: Standing on their heads is an expression.  
ADRIC: Oh.  
DOCTOR: As a matter of fact, they don't use computers, they use word of mouth.  
ADRIC: Is that another expression?  
DOCTOR: No.  
ADRIC: They speak it?  
DOCTOR: Mutter. Intone.  
ADRIC: Intone the computations?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
ADRIC: Why?  
DOCTOR: I've wondered that myself. I never quite had the nerve to ask them.  
(An unexpected noise comes from the console. The Doctor rushes over to it, and
Adric joins him.)  
DOCTOR: Another instrumentation failure.  
ADRIC: A gravity bubble?  
DOCTOR: No.  
(The Doctor hits the console and it starts beeping.)  
DOCTOR: Definitely a gravity bubble. Pretty local too, by the look of it.  
ADRIC: Is that dangerous?  
DOCTOR: Well, we'd better not dematerialise till I've investigated. I have a
feeling I'm overlooking the obvious again. Back in two shakes.  
(The Doctor stands in the Tardis doorway and looks at Vanessa and Tegan
arguing over the flat tyres. He is about to go back inside when he sees the
white figure across the road. Their eyes meet, then he goes back inside. Adric
is trying to pick the lock of the police box.)  
DOCTOR: What are you doing, Adric?  
ADRIC: I thought it might have something to do with the gravity bubble.  
DOCTOR: What?  
(The police box door creaks open invitingly.)  
DOCTOR: I'm afraid you're right. No! You'd better leave this to me.

**[Second Tardis]**

(The Doctor enters the police box and finds himself in a more dimly lit
console room. Adric has of course followed him.)  
DOCTOR: Get back to the Tardis.  
ADRIC: But this is the Tardis.  
DOCTOR: A Tardis, perhaps.  
ADRIC: It looks just like yours.  
DOCTOR: Yes, down to the last detail. No, wait, wait.  
(The second police box still has the telephone dangling on its wire.)  
DOCTOR: This could be terribly dangerous. You'd better stay with me.

**[Barnet lay-by]**

(Vanessa has got the old flat tyre off its hub at last.)  
VANESSA: There you are, Tegan, dear. I've got the knack too.  
TEGAN: I wish there was a knack to blowing up a spare tyre with a hole in it.
Really, Aunt Vanessa, what's the point in driving around with a dud spare
tyre?  
VANESSA: It's the garage, then.  
TEGAN: Crooks and swindlers, but I suppose we've got no choice.  
VANESSA: Unless we wait for a knight errant?  
TEGAN: No, thank you. Look, you stay here and get your breath back, and I'll
go.  
(Tegan sets off, rolling the flat tyre.)  
VANESSA: Take your bag, dear. You might have to pay for it. Ah, there's a
girl. Good girl.  
(Tegan stops at the police box and lets the tyre fall into a puddle.)  
TEGAN: (reads) Police telephone, free for use of public. Advice and assistance
obtainable immediately. Officers and cars respond to urgent calls. Pull to
open.  
(Instead, the door swings open.)  
TEGAN: That's funny. It's very peculiar indeed.

**[Tardis]**

(Tegan enters as the 'police box' dematerialises from the console room and we
discover that Adric had used a set of library steps to get up on top of it.
The doors close behind Tegan, trapping her.)

**[Second Tardis]**

ADRIC: So it is another Tardis.  
DOCTOR: It's too early to tell.  
(He puts the telephone back on its cradle.)  
DOCTOR: There are other things that can cause this sort of dimensional
anomaly. See if you can do that again.  
(Adric unlocks the police box.)

**[Tardis]**

TEGAN: Hello? Anybody there?  
(She walks round the console.)  
TEGAN: Well, there must be intelligent life at the end of this lot.  
(She flicks a switch as if it is an intercom.)  
TEGAN: Hello? Anybody receiving me? Hello? Come in, anybody. My name's Tegan
Jovanka. I'd like to speak to the pilot.  
(The Cloister Bell tolls. She follows the sound to the interior door and opens
it.)  
TEGAN: Is that the crew in there?  
(Tegan goes deeper into the Tardis.)

**[Barnet lay-by]**

(Vanessa spots the wheel lying in the puddle, and the police box door ajar.
She looks inside.)  
VANESSA: Tegan? Goodness me.

**[Third Tardis]**

(This console room is even darker. Again, the telephone is dangling on its
wire.)  
ADRIC: How many more of these are there?  
(The Doctor replaces the receiver on its cradle.)  
ADRIC: It couldn't be an infinite regression, could it?  
DOCTOR: I hope not, because if it is, we'll never get out of it.  
(The Doctor takes Adric's badge for mathematical excellence.)  
DOCTOR: Here, you do it.  
(Adric uses the pin to pick the police box door. A bell tolls.)  
ADRIC: Listen.

**[Barnet lay-by]**

(Vanessa backs out of the police box, away from someone who is laughing
evilly.)  
VANESSA: No!  
(She picks up the wheel to try and defend herself.)

**[Third Tardis]**

ADRIC: Someone's trying to get in touch with us.  
DOCTOR: We can't go back now.  
ADRIC: Done it.  
DOCTOR: We must be getting near to the nucleus of the bubble.  
ADRIC: What's causing it?  
DOCTOR: Another Tardis.  
ADRIC: What? Materialising round the police box just as we planned to do?  
DOCTOR: Yes. Someone's been here before us. Stay here, Adric.  
(The Doctor enters the police box.)

**[Barnet lay-by]**

(And exits on the far side of the police box. Plain clothes and uniformed
police have arrived to investigate the abandoned little car.)  
DOCTOR: Ah, good morning.  
DETECTIVE: Good morning. This your vehicle?  
DOCTOR: Which vehicle?  
DETECTIVE: The sports car.  
DOCTOR: No.  
DETECTIVE: Ah.

**[Third Tardis]**

DETECTIVE [OC]: I just wondered how you came to be here. There is only the
road, after all.  
DOCTOR [OC]: It isn't easy to explain.

**[Barnet lay-by]**

DETECTIVE: Well, while you're trying to work that one out, perhaps you'd like
to explain this?  
(The detective takes the Doctor over to the car, and he looks into the
driver's seat.)  
DOCTOR: So he did escape from Traken.  
(Meanwhile, Tegan has got herself lost in the Tardis' endless corridors.)  
DETECTIVE: I think you'd better come along with us.  
DOCTOR: But he's still about, somewhere.  
DETECTIVE: He, sir?  
DOCTOR: Yes. The Master.  
(On the drivers seat are two little dolls - a policeman and Vanessa.)

__**Part Two**__

**[Barnet lay-by]**

(Adric comes out of the Tardis.)  
DOCTOR: Now just a minute, officer. You don't realise what's going on here.  
DETECTIVE: No, sir, and I don't want to have to go into detail. You want to
think yourself lucky that I don't have to be the judge.  
DOCTOR: Me lucky? You don't think that I? You do think.  
DETECTIVE: I'm not paid to have opinions, sir. I'm paid to do my duty.  
DOCTOR: Well, I do have opinions. This is the calling card of the most evil
genius in the universe and I have to tell you gentlemen, I've got to get after
him. Now, if you'll just help me to create a diversion, hmm?  
(Adric looks around for something to use to create the diversion.)  
DETECTIVE: I think you'd just better come along to the station with us, sir.  
DOCTOR: I'd love to.  
DETECTIVE: Just to assist us in our enquiries.  
(Adric picks up the policeman's bicycle as the policemen escort the Doctor to
their patrol car.)  
DOCTOR: Would you mind awfully if I stopped to telephone my solicitor?  
DETECTIVE: You can do that back at the station.  
DOCTOR: It seems we're going to be awfully busy at this station of yours. I
mean, isn't that a telephone box?  
DETECTIVE: That's a police box, sir, not for  
DOCTOR: But that would do fine, don't you agree?  
DETECTIVE: Look, sir, if you want a formal arrest  
DOCTOR: Er, no.  
(The Doctor gets into the back of the patrol car with the detective. Adric is
lying on the ground apparently having fallen from the bicycle in the road.)  
ADRIC: Help! Help me, please! Quickly! Help! Please help!  
(Everyone gets out of the car.)  
ADRIC: Help!  
(The Doctor runs for the Tardis.)  
DETECTIVE: Get him, Davis!  
(The policeman runs to help Adric.)  
ADRIC: Help!  
DETECTIVE: Not that one, you fool! The other one!  
(As the Doctor get into the Tardis, Adric gets up and pushes the bicycle into
the policeman then follows the Doctor inside.)

**[Tardis]**

(The Cloister Bell is tolling and the police box has disappeared.)  
ADRIC: The box has gone.  
DOCTOR: It could be anywhere in the Tardis.  
ADRIC: Battle stations?  
DOCTOR: Absolutely.

**[Barnet lay-by]**

(The detective taps politely on the Tardis door.)  
DETECTIVE: Come on now, sir.

**[Tardis]**

ADRIC: The Cloister Bell!  
DOCTOR: A choice of emergencies. We'd better dematerialise first.  
(But the sound is very slow.)  
ADRIC: What's the matter?  
DOCTOR: The Tardis is very sluggish. We may not have any choice at all.

**[Barnet lay-by]**

DETECTIVE: Get the key.

**[Tardis]**

DOCTOR: It's dragging us back. We'll have to find some more power from
somewhere.  
ADRIC: The Cloister Bell!  
DOCTOR: Well, shut the door, then. There must be some way of simplifying this.
Architectural configuration, that's the one.  
ADRIC: What's that?  
DOCTOR: Interior allocation of space. Adric, I'm going to jettison Romana's
room.  
ADRIC: Are you sure?  
DOCTOR: This is life. Nothing's sure.  
ADRIC: I'm sorry, I just  
DOCTOR: Look, do you want a quick decision or a debate?  
ADRIC: Sorry!  
(The time rotor starts moving.)  
DOCTOR: You see? There's no need to shout.  
(In the lay-by, a policeman hands a set of keys to the detective.)  
ADRIC: We're moving.  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
ADRIC: So that other Tardis really has gone.  
DOCTOR: Somehow I rather doubt that. Come on, Adric.  
ADRIC: But aren't you going to answer the Cloister Bell?  
DOCTOR: Why don't you answer it? Go on. Go on.  
(Adric leaves. The Doctor flicks some switches and listens closely to the
console. The Cloister Bell stops, and Adric runs back.)

**[Barnet lay-by]**

(The detective opens the door to an ordinary police box, containing a
clipboard on the wall and some hazard lights.)  
DETECTIVE: There's got to me some trick to this, Davis.

**[Cloister room]**

TEGAN: This place is unreal.  
(She sits on a stone bench, then a police box materialises in front of her.)

**[Tardis]**

ADRIC: Doctor, it stopped.  
DOCTOR: Yes, so now we know.  
ADRIC: Know what?  
DOCTOR: The message was very faint. It was from Traken.  
ADRIC: Traken? How's Nyssa?  
DOCTOR: Nyssa's all right.  
ADRIC: Tremas?  
DOCTOR: Vanished. The Master must have had a second Tardis hidden away
somewhere.  
ADRIC: The Master's escaped from Traken? But why take Nyssa's father?  
DOCTOR: To renew himself. He was very near the end of his twelfth
regeneration.  
ADRIC: He's taken over Tremas?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
ADRIC: Can a Time Lord do that?  
DOCTOR: Well, not just a Time Lord by himself, but with some of the powers of
the Keepership still lingering. Huh, and I was so sure. I was so sure. He must
have known I was going to fix the chameleon circuit.  
ADRIC: He read your mind?  
DOCTOR: Well, he's a Time Lord! In many ways, we have the same mind.  
ADRIC: Are we still going to Logopolis?  
DOCTOR: No, how can we with the Master in the Tardis? They're a retiring
people. They like a quiet life. There's no telling what a creature like that
would do on Logopolis.  
ADRIC: So how do we flush him out?  
DOCTOR: And there's no saying what that might do to the Tardis systems. Can
you swim?  
ADRIC: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Good. Materialise the Tardis underwater and open the door.  
(Down in the Cloister Room, Tegan walks round the police box. The door opens
invitingly.  
The Doctor calls up an aerial view of London on the scanner.)  
DOCTOR: That's the River Thames. We'll put down there.  
ADRIC: And water sluices in and floods out the whole Tardis.  
DOCTOR: Yes. Adric, shut down everything. Fold back the Omega configuration.  
(Adric gets on the floor underneath the console.)  
ADRIC: Folded back.  
DOCTOR: Good. Exponential cross-field?  
ADRIC: Halted.  
DOCTOR: Good. Pathways to conditional states seven to seventeen?  
ADRIC: Closed.  
DOCTOR: Excellent. Main and auxiliary drive?  
ADRIC: Ended.  
DOCTOR: Good. Now, we're partially materialised, so there'll be a slight jolt.
Are you ready?  
ADRIC: If you are.  
DOCTOR: What? Well, I'd feel more confident if you just said yes.  
ADRIC: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Good. Here we go, then.

**[Cloister room]**

(Tegan gets jolted.)  
TEGAN: This is too much!

**[Tardis]**

DOCTOR: A gentle splash-down.  
(Thud! They fall to the floor.)  
DOCTOR: We must have touched bottom.  
ADRIC: Touched bottom?  
DOCTOR: Yes. Good thing the water was there to break our fall.

**[Cloister room]**

TEGAN: Crazy idiot of a pilot! Wait till I have a word with him.  
(Laughter comes from the open door of the police box.)  
TEGAN: Who's that?

**[Tardis]**

(The Doctor is standing braced across the doors.)  
DOCTOR: Careful, now. The water pressure could send us both flying. Ready?  
ADRIC: Yes.  
DOCTOR: Now!  
(Adric presses a button and runs to join the Doctor. The doors do not move.)  
DOCTOR: That's odd. There's no pressure on those doors at all.  
ADRIC: Perhaps we aren't down very deep.  
(The doors swing open and they step outside.)

**[River Thames]**

DOCTOR: Ah. I thought there's be a perfectly simple explanation.  
(The Tardis has parked herself neatly on Cadogan Pier in Chelsea, jutting out
into the Thames.  
In the Cloister room, Tegan is backing away from the evil laughter.)  
ADRIC: Nearly got it right.  
DOCTOR: Nearly, but not quite right. There's something not quite right about
all of this.  
ADRIC: The Master.  
(They look up at the Albert Bridge, where a pale figure is watching them. It
gestures to them to come up.)  
DOCTOR: Nothing like this has ever happened before. I've got to get to the
bottom of this. You stay here.  
(Tegan escapes from the Cloister Room.  
Adric watches as the Doctor talks to the Watcher up on the bridge.)

**[Tardis corridor]**

TEGAN: I definitely came in this way. So this must be the way out.

**[Cloister room]**

TEGAN: Round and round like a hamster in a cage! Somebody must be in charge
here!  
(Tegan finally burst into tears, and the police box dematerialises.)  
TEGAN: We'll just have to give it one more go.  
(She runs out, and a fig tree in a pot materialises.)

**[Tardis]**

DOCTOR: Door.  
(Adric presses the button to close the outer doors.)  
ADRIC: Who was that? Doctor, who was that?  
DOCTOR: Set.  
ADRIC: Where are we going?  
DOCTOR: Logopolis.  
ADRIC: What?  
DOCTOR: I've just dipped into the future. We must be prepared for the worst.  
(The Tardis dematerialises from the Pier.)  
ADRIC: So that was the Master?  
DOCTOR: Hmm? How do you deduce that?  
ADRIC: I just guessed.  
DOCTOR: Never guess. Unless you have to. There's enough uncertainty in the
universe as it is.  
ADRIC: But I can help you. Well, can't I?  
DOCTOR: In the ordinary way, yes. This is something far too serious.  
ADRIC: What sort of something?  
DOCTOR: A chain of circumstances that fragments the law that holds the
universe together.  
(The Tardis materialises in mid-air over a sinuous arrangement of adobe houses
dominated by a large radio telescope.)  
ADRIC: Logopolis?  
DOCTOR: Yes. That aerial's a recent addition.  
ADRIC: Are we going to be staying long?  
DOCTOR: You are.  
ADRIC: What?  
DOCTOR: You and I have to part company.  
ADRIC: Look, if you're going after Nyssa, I'm coming too.  
DOCTOR: Adric, don't argue.  
(Tegan runs in.)  
TEGAN: I demand to see whoever's in charge of this ship!  
(Elegant silver-haired Logopolitans wearing gold and black drapery gather at
an open area on the edge of town. The Tardis materialises.)  
TEGAN: Tegan Jovanka. And I'm not answering any more questions until you tell
me exactly who you are.  
ADRIC: I'm Adric. That's the Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Who is she? Where did she come from? What are we going to do with her?  
TEGAN: You can take me right back where you found me, Doctor whoever you are.
My aunt's waiting in the car to take me to the airport.  
DOCTOR: Your aunt? Woman in the white hat, red sports car?  
TEGAN: You've seen her?  
DOCTOR: Well, a little of her. That settles it. She's got to come with us.  
TEGAN: Settles what? Now wait a minute, Doctor.

**[Logopolis]**

(The fig tree in a pot leaves the Cloister Room and appears behind the
Logopolitans just before the Doctor pokes his head out of the Tardis door.)  
MONITOR: My dear Doctor. Logopolis is honoured by your visit.  
DOCTOR: Well, it's very nice of you to put it like that, Monitor.  
TEGAN: I demand to know what's  
DOCTOR: Shush. We're all very honoured to be here.  
TEGAN: (sotto) Where's here?  
DOCTOR: Logopolis.  
MONITOR: Welcome. Time has changed little for either of us, Doctor. You
continue to roam the universe, while we persist in our simple existence on
this planet.  
DOCTOR: Yes. The antenna's new, Monitor.  
MONITOR: Occasionally our researches require what is sometimes called
technology. But for the most part, our computations are enough.  
(The Doctor and the Monitor walk along a passageway where people sit in
doorways working abacuses.)  
DOCTOR: If your computations can help solve a problem in my Tardis, I'd be
eternally grateful, Monitor.  
MONITOR: You have recorded the dimensions we need as data?  
DOCTOR: Yes, all noted down. Monitor, I don't wish to press you but my problem
is now extremely urgent.  
MONITOR: It will only take a moment.  
(They arrive at a large red door.)  
MONITOR: Why don't we proceed to business immediately?  
DOCTOR: Yes, yes.

**[Central Registry]**

(A few computer terminals with some plastic wrapping still on them, and a
large printer are in the room.)  
DOCTOR: But all this is new, Monitor, and vaguely familiar.  
MONITOR: This is purely for our advanced researches.  
ADRIC: I thought you said they didn't use computers.  
DOCTOR: That's right.  
MONITOR: May I have the dimensions?  
DOCTOR: Yes, historically the Logopolitans do everything  
MONITOR: The dimensions, Doctor.  
(Outside, the fig tree turns into a stone column and dematerialises. The
Monitor glances at the figures in the notebook.)  
MONITOR: This will only take a moment.  
(The Monitor sits at a console, closes his eyes and starts chanting.)  
MONITOR: Keree gorok gorok, keree gorok per denesta zel octa zarel gorok gorok
keree  
TEGAN: (sotto) What's he doing?  
DOCTOR: The numbers. He's recreating the Tardis.  
(The chant echoes along the adobe streets. Abacuses clatter and people
mutter.)  
MONITOR: The code is being compiled.  
DOCTOR: Thank you, Monitor. I'm certainly looking forward to having a properly
functioning Tardis.  
ADRIC: You mean those people we saw in the streets are working it out for
themselves?  
MONITOR: Yes.  
ADRIC: What, without technology?  
MONITOR: Block transfer computation is a complex discipline, way beyond the
capabilities of simple machines. It requires all the subtleties of the living
mind. Is that not so, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Oh, indeed, Monitor, indeed.  
(Out in the town, the column has appeared behind one man sitting in his
doorway, working. There is a whirring sound, a pot breaks and someone laughs
over a tiny figure of the man now lying by his overturned stool.)  
TEGAN: When am I going to get an explanation for all this?  
DOCTOR: Do you really feel up to an explanation?  
TEGAN: I'll try.  
DOCTOR: Well. Adric, you explain.  
ADRIC: It's not the Doctor's fault you wandered aboard.  
TEGAN: Wandered? Listen, that ship was deliberately disguised as a police box.
I just want to know who you are and where I am.  
ADRIC: Look, I'd better explain.  
MONITOR: This will restore your chameleon circuit, Doctor.  
(The Doctor takes the piece of paper.)  
DOCTOR: Splendid, Monitor. I've really been looking forward to this. Of
course! The Pharos Project! But this is a near replica of the Pharos computer
room.  
MONITOR: It is a perfectly logical copy.  
DOCTOR: What?  
MONITOR: I always thought you underestimated the possibilities of block
transfer computation, Doctor. You see, structure is the essence of matter, and
the essence of structure is mathematics.  
DOCTOR: What, you can model the Pharos Project mathematically?  
MONITOR: Of course, and supply the necessary raw energy.  
DOCTOR: Well, then, you can model any space-time event in the universe.  
MONITOR: That is true. Now, shall we implement the solution to your little
problem, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Yes. Yes.  
ADRIC: What's a Pharos, Doctor?  
TEGAN: Ancient Greek for lighthouse.  
ADRIC: What's a lighthouse?

**[Logopolis]**

DOCTOR: A famous Earth project to transmit signals to remote planets.  
MONITOR: I understand they're trying to get intelligent life to respond.  
DOCTOR: Ah.  
(They return to the Tardis.)  
DOCTOR: Monitor, I must ask you a very special favour.  
MONITOR: My dear Doctor, of course.  
DOCTOR: Adric and the girl. Would you look after them for me?  
MONITOR: You don't want them with you in the Tardis?  
DOCTOR: No. What lies ahead is for me, not for them. I hate farewells.  
(The Doctor goes into the Tardis, and shuts the door on Tegan and Adric.
Inside, he starts inputting the figures the Monitor gave him.)  
MONITOR: There is a chance the computation may produce an instability.  
ADRIC: The Doctor's in danger?  
MONITOR: A simple precaution. There is very little that could go wrong. In
fact, nothing at all.  
ADRIC: But he said he was expecting danger.  
MONITOR: I must confess, I misled the Doctor in order to have the pleasure of
your company while he engages in this mundane task. Now, perhaps you would
like to see more of Logopolis.  
(The Monitor leads Adric and Tegan back into the passageways.)  
TEGAN: I'd prefer to see a lot less of it. Can you give me some idea how long
we're going to be delayed here?  
ADRIC: I'm sorry. She's upset.  
TEGAN: Too right I'm upset. Wouldn't you be?  
NYSSA [OC]: Adric!  
TEGAN: I've got a job to do.  
(Adric runs back to the open space.)  
NYSSA: Adric.  
ADRIC: Nyssa! How did you get here?  
NYSSA: A friend of the Doctor's brought me. He's here, somewhere.  
TEGAN: Who's Nyssa?  
ADRIC: She's the friend who helped me on Traken.  
NYSSA: Is the Doctor here?  
ADRIC: In the Tardis.  
(The Tardis is glowing blue.)  
TEGAN: Hi, I'm Tegan. Did they hijack you, too?  
ADRIC: What's the matter?  
MONITOR: Transfer instability. It may be only temporary.  
(The Watcher is there.)  
ADRIC: Something's wrong.  
MONITOR: Yes, you're right.  
(The Tardis is shrinking.)  
TEGAN: It's getting smaller.  
ADRIC: Can't you do something?  
MONITOR: I don't understand. I don't understand.  
ADRIC: But the Doctor's in there!  
(And the Tardis continues to shrink.)

__**Part Three**__

**[Logopolis]**

(The shrinking stops at about 2 1/2 feet.)  
ADRIC: It's your codes that are doing this.  
MONITOR: This is unheard of.  
TEGAN: Well, how do we get him out of this?  
MONITOR: A fault in the computation?  
ADRIC: There must be something you can do to put him right.  
MONITOR: Take the machine to the Central Register.  
NYSSA: What are you going to do with it?  
MONITOR: The Central Register, quickly. There may still be time. The honour of
Logopolis is at stake.  
(Four Logopolitans carry the Tardis away.)

**[Tardis]**

DOCTOR: Must dematerialise. Dematerialise. Nothing working. Nothing.  
(The scanner shows the view from the Tardis as it is carried through the
little streets.)

**[Logopolis]**

TEGAN: Will he be all right, Monitor?  
MONITOR: If we can trace the error in time.  
(They walk straight past the laughing Master sitting in a doorway.)  
MASTER: At last, Doctor. At last I've cut you down to size.  
(Inside the Tardis the Doctor can see the faces of the young people but cannot
hear their voices.)

**[Central Registry]**

NYSSA: Hold on, Doctor. The Monitor is going to help you.  
(The Monitor is doing his number chant again.)  
TEGAN: What's he doing?  
MONITOR: The fault is in the dimensioning routine. We can trace it, if there's
time.  
ADRIC: Can I help?  
MONITOR: Perhaps you can.  
(They go over to the printer and the Monitor tears off the paper.)  
MONITOR: This is the machine code of the section that contains the error. I
must check the external registers. Read it to me as we go. It is a copy of an
Earth machine, so I'm afraid we have to make do with their clumsy symbols.  
ADRIC: The Doctor taught me to read Earth numbering.  
TEGAN: Where are you off to? There's work to be done.  
ADRIC: We're doing it.

**[Register room]**

(The Monitor and Adric go into a room with two rows of Logopolitans sitting
with their abacuses, facing the walls. The Monitor goes along the row, looking
over the worker's shoulders.)  
ADRIC: A zero. Zero A. Four A. Nine two. Two C.  
(And into another identical room.)  
ADRIC: A zero. Three zero.  
MONITOR: I'm sorry, I thought we had found something. It's somewhere in the
subroutine. Somewhere.  
ADRIC: Monitor, I still don't see why you need all these people. Why can't it
all be done on machinery?  
MONITOR: For many uses machinery is unsurpassed, but Logopolis is not
interested in such uses. Block transfer computation cannot be done with
computers.  
ADRIC: Why not?  
MONITOR: Our manipulation of numbers directly changes the physical world.
There is no other mathematics like ours.  
ADRIC: You mean the computations themselves would affect a computer?  
MONITOR: Of course. Change its nature, cause it to malfunction. Only the
living brain is immune.  
ADRIC: But you had a computer out there. You were using it.  
MONITOR: To record the code, yes. To prepare new algorithms, yes. But we must
not use it to run our programme. Now, we had reached zero four, zero seven, A
zero, three zero, three eight. There are no errors in the registers. We must
search the streets.

**[Central Registry]**

(Two screens are brought up to either side of the Tardis.)  
NYSSA: Sonic projectors.  
TEGAN: What are they for?  
NYSSA: They must be creating a temporary zone of stasis around the Tardis, but
I don't really understand their science.  
TEGAN: That goes double for me.

**[Logopolis]**

(The Monitor is inspecting the home workers.)  
ADRIC: Fourth block begins. A three. F eight.  
MONITOR: E eight.  
ADRIC: Sorry. E eight.  
MONITOR: It is difficult, I know, but accuracy is of a vital importance.  
ADRIC: Three three.

**[Central Registry]**

TEGAN: You can tell they're exploited.  
NYSSA: These people are scientists.  
TEGAN: So?  
NYSSA: I've seen that look of dedication on my father's face.  
TEGAN: Well, it doesn't seem to be doing any good, does it.  
NYSSA: At least the dimensions are stabilised.

**[Logopolis]**

ADRIC: Eight nine. Nine A. E seven.  
MONITOR: E nine.  
ADRIC: Sorry. E nine. Two three. Wait! Wait. Did you say E nine? Look, it says
E seven there.  
MONITOR: You're right. And the next three numbers are wrong. This way.

**[Central Registry]**

TEGAN: The Tardis isn't much use to anybody that size, stable or not.  
NYSSA: It gives us time.  
TEGAN: Time to do what? We don't even know if he's alive in there.

**[Tardis]**

DOCTOR: They've arrested the dimension spiral. Things are looking up.

**[Logopolis]**

MONITOR: This is the street. The error should be somewhere here.  
(They find a tiny Logopolitan lying on his stool. Then a second and a third.)  
MONITOR: Sabotage.  
ADRIC: Murder.  
MONITOR: Interfering with the working of Logopolis. The most dangerous crime
in the universe.

**[Tardis]**

(The Doctor has got his piece of paper.)  
DOCTOR: An error in the dimension subroutine. Somewhere here. I will not be
beaten. I simply will not be beaten. But I could certainly do with a little
more help from outside.

**[Logopolis]**

(Adric sees the Watcher standing at the end of the street.)  
MONITOR: We must return to the Central Register, quickly.

**[Central Register]**

ADRIC: The Monitor's done it. He's found the error.  
MONITOR: The Doctor must reprogram block four of the dimensioning routine.  
ADRIC: Those numbers are the ones that have to be changed.  
TEGAN: If I show this to him, will he know what to do?  
ADRIC: Yes.  
TEGAN: Leave it to me.  
(Tegan holds the printout up to the light on top of the Tardis. Adric leaves.)  
NYSSA: Adric?

**[Outside the Central Register]**

ADRIC: The Master's out here somewhere.  
NYSSA: I came here to find the Master.  
ADRIC: No.  
NYSSA: I must know what's happened to my father.  
ADRIC: This could be very dangerous.  
NYSSA: I'm coming with you.  
(Tegan watches them walk off down the street, then returns to the Tardis.)

**[Tardis]**

(The Doctor has got a couple of circuit boards out.)  
DOCTOR: The cheeseboard is the world, and the pieces the phenomena of the
universe, as my old friend Huxley used to say. Cheese board? Chess board. And
the opponent makes no allowances for mistakes nor makes the smallest
concession to ignorance.  
(That's Thomas H Huxley's essay published in 1868, if you want to look it up.)  
DOCTOR: I'm an ignorant old Doctor, and I've made a mistake. There's only one
direction help can come from now. I'll just have to sit here and wait.  
(Finally he looks up and sees the code on the scanner.)  
DOCTOR: Ah yes! Something along those lines.

**[Logopolis]**

(Adric shows Nyssa the miniaturised people.)  
ADRIC: The mark of the Master.  
NYSSA: He must have added his own voice to the numbers and corrupted the
Doctor's code.  
ADRIC: And he's still here, somewhere. I saw him. He's been following us.  
NYSSA: The Master?  
ADRIC: I think so.  
(The Watcher walks past behind them. Adric turns.)  
ADRIC: Come on.

**[Central Registry]**

TEGAN: I hope he's seen it.  
MONITOR: I'm sure he has. And with those figures, he will be able to restore
the Tardis. It won't take long.  
TEGAN: Well, while he's sorting that out, perhaps you wouldn't mind explaining
something to me.  
(She opens the door to the rows of Logopolitans at their abacuses.)  
TEGAN: Back home in Brisbane, we call that a sweatshop.

**[Logopolis]**

ADRIC: This street.  
MASTER [OC]: Nyssa. Nyssa. Nyssa.  
(Nyssa turns back to find the voice.)  
MASTER [OC]: Nyssa, my dear.  
(She finds the right doorway.)  
NYSSA: Father.

**[Central Register]**

TEGAN: They don't smile, they don't talk to anybody.  
MONITOR: Their language is the language of numbers. And they have no need to
smile.  
TEGAN: No need to smile?  
MONITOR: We are a people driven not by individual need but by mathematical
necessity. The language of the numbers is as much as we need. Now, it is
important that we do not disturb them.  
TEGAN: But if they don't talk to each other. You've done it!  
(The Tardis is growing.)  
MONITOR: Yes, there does seem to be some positive development.

**[Logopolis]**

(Tremas the Master has led Nyssa to the edge of town.)  
NYSSA: But what is this mission of yours, father? You're so changed by it. You
look younger, but so cold.  
MASTER: Logopolis is a cold place. A cold, high place overlooking the
universe. It holds a single great secret, Nyssa, which you and I must discover
together.  
NYSSA: And the Doctor. The Doctor can help us.  
MASTER: Oh yes, the Doctor can certainly help us. You must return to him.  
NYSSA: Father, I don't want to be parted from you.  
MASTER: No need to, my dear. Here, wear this.  
(The Master fastens a chunky gold bracelet studded with big gems around
Nyssa's wrist. It hurts her.)  
MASTER: It will keep us in mind of one another. Remember to tell no one that
you've seen me, yet.

**[Central Registry]**

(The Doctor staggers out of the Tardis.)  
DOCTOR: Monitor?  
MONITOR: My dear Doctor.  
DOCTOR: I can't thank you enough.  
MONITOR: There is no need.  
DOCTOR: You too, Tegan. You too. Where are the others?  
TEGAN: Adric and Nyssa went to look for the Master.  
DOCTOR: What? They should know better than that. There've been enough
unnecessary deaths as it is.  
TEGAN: What deaths?  
MONITOR: The murder of innocent Logopolitans.  
DOCTOR: And the murder of innocent Earth people.  
TEGAN: Earth people?  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
TEGAN: Aunty Vanessa?  
DOCTOR: Yes. I'm so sorry, Tegan. I'm so sorry.  
(Tegan moves away to cry.)  
DOCTOR: The Master's already at work on Logopolis. I'm going to stop him if
it's the last thing I do.

**[Logopolis]**

(At a street junction.)  
ADRIC: Nyssa!  
NYSSA: Did you find him?  
ADRIC: No. We'd better go back to the Doctor.  
NYSSA: Ow!  
ADRIC: Where did you get that?  
NYSSA: It's too small for me.  
ADRIC: What is it?  
NYSSA: It's a present. I've been trying to get it off.  
ADRIC: Who from?  
(Adric touches the bracelet and gets an electric shock.)  
NYSSA: I hope you haven't broken it.  
ADRIC: Nyssa?  
DOCTOR: Adric, Nyssa. Come on.  
ADRIC + NYSSA: Doctor!  
(In the Registry, the sonic screens are wheeled out between the rows of
Logopolitans. One of them gets up and follows, chuckling. It is the Master.
When they get into the second room, he miniaturises the two men pushing the
screens, and carries on with one of them to the end of the room. There he
turns it round and plugs in a control unit then switches on.)  
DOCTOR: I don't want you two chasing after the Master independently. You,
Adric, should know how dangerous he is.  
(The Watcher is waiting at the end of the street.)  
NYSSA: That's the man who brought me from Traken.  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
NYSSA: He said he was a friend of yours.  
ADRIC: But he's the man on the bridge.  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
ADRIC: You said to be prepared for the worst.  
DOCTOR: Indeed I did, and I am prepared for the worst.  
ADRIC: Why are you prepared for the worst, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Because he's here.

**[Central Registry]**

(With all the calculations in the Registry halted by the stasis field, the
Master removes his Logopolitan robe and wheels one of the screens in. The
Monitor and Tegan turn round to see him.)  
MASTER: Please remain where you are. I have it in my power to bring Logopolis
to a complete halt.

**[Logopolis]**

DOCTOR: There's much more to this block transfer computation than we thought.  
ADRIC: Yes, that's how they built a replica of the Pharos Project.  
DOCTOR: Yes. Yes, but why? Why build a replica of the Pharos Project? Central
Register.  
NYSSA: Listen.  
ADRIC: I don't  
NYSSA: Shush.  
ADRIC: (sotto) I can't hear anything.  
DOCTOR: Quite.  
NYSSA: Logopolis has stopped.  
DOCTOR: And I was vain enough to think it was me he was after. Logopolis is
his target.

**[Central Register]**

MONITOR: Turn that machine off. You have no idea what you're doing.  
MASTER: Merely emitting a sound-cancelling wave, Monitor. Logopolis is now
temporarily suspended. The silence gives us an opportunity to discuss its
future.  
MONITOR: There will be no future. You are eroding structure, generating
entropy.  
MASTER: An absurd assertion. I know the power of this device down to the last
decibel.  
MONITOR: But you do not know Logopolis!  
MASTER: But I shall, shan't I, when you've told me of the secret work you're
doing here.  
MONITOR: I cannot tell you.  
MASTER: Why have you created a copy of the Pharos Project? Hmm. The time has
come for you to share your secret with me.  
MONITOR: No! No one must know. That has been our firm decision.  
MASTER: Very well, we'll wait until you change it. Patience is a particular
virtue of mine.  
(The Doctor, Nyssa and Adric enter.)  
NYSSA: Father!  
DOCTOR: That's not your father. Tremas is dead, murdered by him, the Master.  
MASTER: Nyssa.  
NYSSA: You killed my father?  
(The Master takes Nyssa to one side.)  
MASTER: But his body remains useful. Without it I could not have conquered
Logopolis.  
DOCTOR: This is not conquest, it's devastation.  
MASTER: It's nothing more than a blanket of silence.  
DOCTOR: Which is killing the Logopolitans and turning them to dust.  
MASTER: You expect me to believe that?  
DOCTOR: Yes!  
MONITOR: You're destroying everything. It may already be too late.  
MASTER: You exaggerate, Monitor. Logopolis is not the universe.  
MONITOR: But it is! Logopolis is the keystone. If you destroy Logopolis, you
unravel the whole causal nexus.  
MASTER: Causal nexus? You insult my intelligence.  
DOCTOR: You're interfering with the law of cause and effect.  
(Adric grabs the sonic screen and moves it away from the main console. The
Master presses a button on a box he is holding and Nyssa moves forward to grab
Adric by the throat.)  
ADRIC: Nyssa! Nyssa, let go.  
MASTER: That is a demonstration of the causal nexus.  
(Tegan attacks the Master.)  
TEGAN: You revolting man!  
(The Master throws her off. Nyssa is impassively choking Adric.)  
MASTER: The electro-muscular constrictor gives me complete control over that
hand. Please replace the screen.  
TEGAN: I wouldn't take orders from you if you were the last man in the
universe.  
MASTER: Very well, one of your young friends will eliminate the other.  
(The Doctor sends Tegan to obey. The Master releases Adric.)  
DOCTOR: Don't you understand? Logopolis is crucial to the whole of creation.
This could mean the end of the universe.  
MASTER: I've never been persuaded by hyperbole, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Then come into the streets and see what's happening.  
MASTER: No need for that. I can demonstrate the continued functioning of
Logopolis from here. This device only creates temporary silence and can be
switched off.  
(He does so. Silence remains. They all dash outside.)

**[Outside the Central Registry]**

MONITOR: You will hear nothing. Local disruption of structure is now
irreversible. Logopolis is dead.

**[Logopolis]**

(The Master hunts through the streets, but the doorways are all empty.)  
MASTER: They've done this deliberately. You've done this deliberately to
deprive me of my prize!  
MONITOR: Nothing is solid now. Entropy has taken over.  
(Nyssa, Adric and Tegan look through a doorway at a decaying corpse and
falling mud brick.)  
TEGAN: What's he done?  
ADRIC: Everything began to waste away when he interfered. But why?  
DOCTOR: The numbers were supporting the whole system.  
MASTER: I don't believe it. My biomechanism's untouched.  
MONITOR: The degradation is random.  
MASTER: No, Monitor. This is some crude defence mechanism. A device to delude
me. Come, Nyssa.  
(He uses his control device to make her walk forward.)  
NYSSA: No. No.  
MASTER: I will wring the truth out of it.  
(The Master tries to force Nyssa to strangle the Monitor, but it doesn't
work.)  
DOCTOR: The entropy you released is eroding your systems, too.  
MASTER: Entropy? Absurd. The power is weak. Some freak interference. Increase
the power.  
MONITOR: More power would simply speed the collapse.  
(Nyssa pulls of the bracelet, which now crumbles.)  
DOCTOR: Don't.  
(The Doctor picks up the pieces and crushes them easily.)  
MONITOR: From this point, the unravelling will spread out until the whole
universe is reduced to nothing.  
MASTER: So it's true.  
(The Master walks away.)  
MONITOR: Yes, Doctor, you were right. Our numbers were holding the fabric of
the universe together.  
NYSSA: But how? Surely in a closed system like the universe, entropy is bound
to increase?  
MONITOR: Certainly. The universe long ago passed the point of total collapse.  
DOCTOR: Passed the point?  
MONITOR: If it had remained closed. But we have the means to postpone the
time.  
MASTER: So that's why you adapted the Pharos Project.  
MONITOR: Yes. We opened the system by creating voids into other universes.  
ADRIC: The Charged Vacuum Emboitments!  
DOCTOR: We passed through one of your voids, Monitor.  
MONITOR: It all depended on our continued endeavours. A temporary solution
while the advanced research unit worked on a more permanent plan. But nothing
will come of that now. Our labours wasted. The voids will be closing.  
(Adobe walls crumble as they walk through the streets.)  
TEGAN: There must be something we can do?  
(A building falls down, blocking the street.)  
TEGAN: This'll teach you to meddle in things you don't understand.  
MONITOR: We are beyond recriminations now. Beyond everything.  
DOCTOR: Not quite.  
(They return to the open space where the Tardis originally landed.)  
DOCTOR: We must pool our resources.  
NYSSA: The creature that killed my father  
DOCTOR: I can't choose the company I keep!  
MASTER: An alliance with you, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: In the circumstances, yes.  
MASTER: If we do cooperate, there'll be no question of you ever returning to
Gallifrey.  
DOCTOR: If we don't cooperate, there'll be no question of Gallifrey.  
TEGAN: Doctor, what are you doing?  
DOCTOR: Please. Shush. As Time Lords, you and I have special responsibilities.  
MASTER: Together, then.  
NYSSA: But Doctor!  
DOCTOR: I've never chosen my own company. Nyssa, it was you who contacted me
and begged me to help you find your father. Tegan, it's your own curiosity
that got you into this. And Adric, a stowaway.  
(The Tardis materialises.)  
TEGAN: The Tardis!  
NYSSA: It's followed us from the Central Register.  
ADRIC: But how can it get here when there's no one in it?  
(The Monitor leaves.)  
DOCTOR: Did I say there was no one in it?  
NYSSA: It must be the man who brought be to Logopolis.  
DOCTOR: I don't want any further argument. One, two, three of you into the
Tardis, quickly. Go on.  
ADRIC: Look, we want to help you.  
DOCTOR: It's impossible. My friend in there will look after you. I'm
collaborating with the Master. Now go on. Battle stations.  
NYSSA: The man's a murderer!  
ADRIC: Come on, Nyssa. He means it.  
(The young people close the Tardis door behind them.)  
MASTER: Together?  
DOCTOR: One last hope.  
(The Master and the Doctor shake hands.)

__**Part Four**__

**[Logopolis]**

(The Doctor shrugs off the Master's attempt to put his arm around his
shoulders.)  
DOCTOR: Monitor? He's gone.  
MASTER: You do realise he's no chance of survival without our help?  
DOCTOR: The Monitor wouldn't abandon us.  
MASTER: He's trying to salvage the research team's work. He must have gone to
the Central Register, yes?  
DOCTOR: Yes, maybe. It was the last addition to Logopolis. It might be the
last one to survive. We need his knowledge. Come on.  
(After the Master and the Doctor have left, Tegan and Adric come out of the
Tardis.)  
ADRIC: We all want to help the Doctor, but we've got to do as he says.  
TEGAN: Listen. The Doctor's my ticket back to London Airport, so I'm going
after him.  
ADRIC: Tegan!  
TEGAN: Have a nice trip.  
(Adric goes back into the Tardis, and it dematerialises.  
Meanwhile, the Doctor and the Master continue to avoid collapsing buildings.)  
DOCTOR: The rot is spilling outwards into the universe from this point after
eons of constraint. Come on. Let's collect the Monitor and get out.

**[Outside the Central Registry]**

MASTER: In my Tardis?  
DOCTOR: There's no other way.  
MASTER: You're assuming a lot, aren't you, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Yes, aren't I.

**[Central Register]**

(The Monitor is working at the main computer console.)  
DOCTOR: Monitor?  
MASTER: Logopolitan maths on a computer?  
DOCTOR: Monitor, the stability of  
MONITOR: This is the programme we were developing to take the burden from our
own shoulders. A series of data statements to keep the Charged Vacuum
Emboitments open of their own accord.  
DOCTOR: What, do you mean the advanced research project?  
MONITOR: The computer holds a complete log of the research.  
(The Master goes to the printer.)  
MASTER: Then the answer's here.  
(He switches it on.)  
MONITOR: Take care. The research is far from complete.  
DOCTOR: Monitor, were you on the right track? You must tell us about the
project in every detail.  
MONITOR: There is nothing to tell. It's all there for you to read. Now, I must
get on with my work.

**[Logopolis]**

TEGAN: Doctor! Doctor!

**[Central Registry]**

MONITOR: I've done what I can, with the Registry in ruins. We must now realign
the aerial, beam the programme out to space. There is a CVE close by we might
still be able to re-open.  
TEGAN: Doctor!  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
TEGAN: Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Tegan, I told you to get out of here.  
TEGAN: No thanks, Doctor. I'm staying with you. You're the only insurance
policy I've got.  
DOCTOR: As safe as houses, eh?  
(The Registry ceiling starts to fall in.)  
MASTER: Doctor, we must form a plan. I propose one, we withdraw to a position
of temporary security. Two, we reconfigure our two Tardises into time cone
inverters. Three, we create a stable safe zone by applying temporal inversion
isometry to as much of space-time as we can isolate.  
TEGAN: Look!  
(The Monitor fades away before their eyes.)  
MASTER: Horrible.  
TEGAN: Hardly more horrible than shrinking people.  
MASTER: No. Do what you like, Doctor. Logopolis is yours.  
TEGAN: Doctor, stop him. He's getting away.  
DOCTOR: No, no, no, no, listen. Reconfigure the two Tardises into time cone
inverters? It would work. What a brilliant mind.  
TEGAN: And what a waste of two more brilliant minds if we don't do something
soon.  
DOCTOR: The Monitor's programme. You can help me.  
TEGAN: I can?  
DOCTOR: Yes. I want this in pieces.  
(They start to dismantle the computer console.  
The Master returns to his stone column Tardis inside an adobe house, and gets
hit by a roof fall. The Doctor holds a bundle of circuit boards in his hands.)  
DOCTOR: As I thought.  
TEGAN: What?  
DOCTOR: Bubble memory.  
TEGAN: Bubble memory.  
DOCTOR: Yes. You realise what this means?  
TEGAN: No, as a matter of fact I don't, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Bubble memory is non-volatile. Remove the power and the bit patterns
are still retained in tiny magnetic domains in these chips. The research
team's final project is still here.  
TEGAN: Which would be great if we had a computer to run it on.  
DOCTOR: I've an idea where we could find one. On Earth.  
TEGAN: Earth.

**[Outside the Central Registry]**

TEGAN: Earth?  
DOCTOR: Yes. The Master's Tardis. Come on.

**[Tardis corridor]**

(Adric and Nyssa watch the Watcher work the controls from the interior door.)  
ADRIC: He's unsetting the coordinates. He's disconnecting the entire
coordinate subsystem. But he can't do that. No!  
NYSSA: What's the matter?  
(Adric shuts the door and drops to his knees.)  
ADRIC: Down!  
(Everything goes negative.)  
NYSSA: What's happening?  
ADRIC: We're being taken right out of time and space.

**[Outside the Master's Tardis]**

(The Master is pinned by fallen debris.)  
DOCTOR: One good lift deserves another, don't you think?  
(The Master groans, and the Doctor heaves the large chunk of masonry of him.)  
MASTER: I'm very grateful.  
DOCTOR: Earth, please.

**[Tardis corridor]**

(Everything comes back to normal. Adric peeks into the console room then shuts
the door again.)  
ADRIC: We're hovering.  
NYSSA: Outside space and time.  
ADRIC: But the Tardis isn't supposed to do that.  
NYSSA: We seem to be safe.  
ADRIC: Safe. Yes. The Doctor told the Watcher to look after us.  
NYSSA: I'd rather be with the Doctor.

**[Pharos Project]**

(In the radio telescope's control room, the duty scientist is conducting music
he is listening to on his headphones. He leaves the room just before the
Master's Tardis materialises and the Doctor steps out, followed by the
Master.)  
MASTER: The Pharos computer room.  
DOCTOR: Yes. I envy you your Tardis, Master.  
MASTER: Excellent, Doctor. Envy is the beginning of all true greatness.  
DOCTOR: Shush.  
(He looks through the door to see the technician getting himself a drink from
a vending machine. They hide behind the Tardis as he comes back. Once the man
has settled back in his chair, the Master points a device at him. The Doctor
snatches it away.)  
DOCTOR: No!  
MASTER: It's the lightspeed overdrive, Doctor. You'll need that to accelerate
the signal from the transmitter.  
DOCTOR: I'm so sorry. I thought you meant to shoot him.  
MASTER: Oh, Doctor. You can explain.  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
(The Doctor walks behind the oblivious technician who is still enjoying his
music.)  
DOCTOR: Ahem. Good morning. Good evening.  
(Then the Doctor notices the Master has the real weapon in his hand and drags
the technician's chair aside. Tegan comes out of the Tardis.)  
DOCTOR: He's unconscious.  
MASTER: Never mind. I feel we've been spared a very difficult conversation.

**[Cloister room]**

ADRIC: When all this began, the Doctor wanted to reconfigure the Tardis so
it'd work like the Master's.  
NYSSA: What's wrong with it?  
ADRIC: It's getting old.  
NYSSA: Entropy again. You can't get away from it.  
(The Watcher beckons to them.)  
ADRIC: He wants to talk to us.  
NYSSA: To you.

**[Pharos Project]**

(Tegan takes to the technician's pulse while the Doctor fits the circuit
boards to the computer.)  
MASTER: What makes you think this programme of the Monitor's is going to work,
Doctor?  
DOCTOR: Oh, I don't know. It's a sort of vague faith in the nature of things,
I suppose.  
MASTER: It's in the very nature of things for entropy to win.  
DOCTOR: Yes, well, it's the age-old battle, isn't it? Entropy versus
structure. Still, while there's life there's six of one and half a dozen of
the other.  
MASTER: Woolly thinking, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Yes, but very comforting when worn next to the skin.

**[Cloister room]**

(Adric finishes his conversation with the Watcher and returns to Nyssa.)  
NYSSA: Well, what did he want? What did he say to you?  
ADRIC: It's as if he knows what's going to happen.  
NYSSA: But what did he say to you, Adric?  
ADRIC: Come on, we've got work to do.

**[Tardis]**

NYSSA: But where are we going?  
ADRIC: The Pharos Project on Earth. Now, I've got to set the exact
coordinates. Earth is in sector eighty twenty three of the third quadrant. The
temporal settings are laid in on this panel. It always looks so easy when the
Doctor does it.  
(Nyssa flicks the scanner switches. It shows a heavily condensed cluster of
galaxies.)  
NYSSA: Adric, the scanner. Adric.  
ADRIC: The whole universe. Of course. We're beyond space and time.  
NYSSA: That must be the entropy field. Where's the Earth?  
ADRIC: I can't see it.  
(The scanner zooms in on Sol and it's planetary system. Saturn is very clear.)  
NYSSA: It's there.  
ADRIC: Earth's galaxy has a few more hours left.  
NYSSA: Adric, I can't see Traken.  
ADRIC: Traken should be  
NYSSA: I can't even see Metulla Orionsis. The Master killed my stepmother, and
then my father, and now the world that I grew up in, blotted out forever.

**[Pharos Project]**

(Tegan looks out of a window then goes back down the corridor to the control
room.)  
TEGAN: The dawn's coming up. There are security guards outside.  
DOCTOR: Any good?  
MASTER: It's still not running. The programme's useless. It's time to abandon
this line of reasoning.  
DOCTOR: Of course. The programme's not being fed into the core.  
MASTER: Well?  
DOCTOR: We start again.

**[Tardis]**

ADRIC: Right, hold on. We're going back.  
(Everything goes negative.)  
ADRIC: Now!  
(The Tardis materialises in some bushes below a giant radio telescope. Jodrell
Bank, probably, even though they are really at Crowsley Park BBC receiver
station with the big wire antennae stretched across fields.)  
NYSSA: Just like Logopolis.  
ADRIC: The Earth people use it to beam messages to the stars. The Doctor calls
it reiterated invitation to alien intelligences in deep space.  
NYSSA: And that's us.  
ADRIC: So they'll be very pleased to see us.  
(Adric and Nyssa leave the Tardis, and hide from a security patrol.)

**[Pharos Project]**

DOCTOR: It's running.  
MASTER: If you call this alien gibberish a programme.  
DOCTOR: Well, we'll just have to wait until the data reaches the CVE.  
MASTER: First we must reach the transmitter and connect up the light speed
overdrive.  
DOCTOR: Yes.  
TEGAN: What about the guards?  
DOCTOR: I suggest we use your Tardis.  
MASTER: Impossible. The light speed overdrive's disconnected.  
DOCTOR: We've still got to get across to the antenna control room.  
MASTER: I agree.  
TEGAN: I agree too, for what it's worth.  
DOCTOR: Good.  
(Adric and Nyssa make their way through scrub. Out in the corridor, the Doctor
looks through a window to see the Watcher standing in the Tardis doorway.)

**[Field]**

(Adric and Nyssa hide behind the hedge and watch the Doctor, Tegan and the
Master who are behind a large tree stump. The Master aims his weapon at the
patrol. The Doctor takes it off him and throws it away. This alerts a guard.)  
GUARD: Intruders! After them!  
(The trio hide behind a shed as the guards meet up with another patrol. Adric
and Nyssa are in the background.)  
MASTER: Sentimental fool. Thanks to you, we're now weaponless.  
ADRIC: Nyssa and I have heard your message across the universe and have come
to answer your call.  
GUARD: Message? What? Now who are you?  
(Tegan runs out.)  
NYSSA: We are the alien beings who  
TEGAN: Listen. Here, you fellows, you've got this all topsy turvy.  
(The Doctor and the Master sneak away. The Watcher goes back inside the
Tardis.  
As the Doctor and Master run back to the telescope, the Master finds his
weapon in the grass. The Doctor reaches the telescope and goes up to the
control room.  
The Master returns to the Pharos Project computer room and takes the
technician's walkman then goes into his own Tardis, laughing.)

**[Antenna control room]**

(The Doctor enters and looks at the mess of wires and circuit boards. One
piece has a flashing red light. The Master laughs.)  
MASTER: From here, Charged Vacuum Emboitment is in line with the constellation
Cassiopeia.  
DOCTOR: Three C four six one.  
MASTER: I decided to use my Tardis after all. Three C four six one. Three zero
four four.  
(The Master taps in the coordinates, and the giant dish begins to move.)  
MASTER: You see, Doctor, I overlook nothing.  
DOCTOR: You overlooked the light speed overdrive.  
MASTER: I gave you this to demonstrate my trust.  
DOCTOR: Thank you.  
(The Master throws the unit out of the door.)  
DOCTOR: What?  
MASTER: But I don't take foolish risks. The real light speed overdrive is
here.  
DOCTOR: What? And powered up, I see.  
MASTER: We have only to connect this cable from the computer room and the job
is done. The aerial's now aligned to the CVE. As you devised the plan, I think
the honour should be yours, Doctor.  
(The Master retreats to another door as the Doctor takes the two computer
connectors and joins them together.)

**[Antenna walkway]**

(The Master goes out onto a walkway underneath the antenna, which is now
pointing directly upwards, and speaks into the tape recorder.)  
MASTER: Peoples of the universe, please attend carefully. The message that
follows is vital to the future of you all.

**[Antenna control room]**

MASTER: Well?  
DOCTOR: The data's reached the CVE. It's stabilising.  
MASTER: So it works. Congratulations, Doctor. I always knew you'd do it.  
DOCTOR: You did most of this.  
MASTER: Oh, no. I was little more than a humble assistant, but I have learned
a great deal. And now I think it's time for you to go and explain the presence
of your friends. There's quite a hubbub outside.  
(Dogs are barking below.)  
DOCTOR: You're quite right. One mistake now could ruin everything.  
MASTER: I know that, Doctor, and it could happen so easily.  
DOCTOR: What do you mean?  
MASTER: The universe is hanging on a thread. A single recursive pulse down
that cable and the CVE would close forever. Even a humble assistant could do
it.  
DOCTOR: You're mad!  
(The Master produces his weapon, then switches on the tape recorder to
broadcast his message to the universe.)  
MASTER [OC]: Peoples of the universe, please attend carefully. The message
that follows is vital to the future of you all. The choice for you all is
simple. A continued existence under my guidance, or total annihilation. At the
time of speaking, the  
DOCTOR: Blackmail.  
MASTER: No, Doctor, I'm merely reporting the state of affairs. I have it in my
power now to save them or destroy them.  
DOCTOR: You're utterly mad.  
MASTER: Back, Doctor. The proceedings must not be interrupted. It's mine. The
CVE. It's all mine.  
DOCTOR: Only while that cable holds.

**[Antenna walkway]**

(The Doctor leaves the control room. The Master notices and follows, only to
trip over the scarf which has been tied across it. He drops his weapon. There
is a struggle and it falls to the ground. Nyssa, Adric and Tegan watch in
horror at events above them. The Master runs back into the control room and
changes the coordinates of the antenna. The walkway begins to tilt as the
antenna moves back from vertical to horizontal. The Master watches from the
doorway as the Doctor tries to hang on. Meanwhile, guards climb the ladder to
the control room. The Doctor crawls to the other end of the walkway and uses a
wrench to try and stop the mechanism. He pulls out the cable, but falls,
dangling from the end of it in mid-air. His enemies flash before his eyes.)  
MASTER: (rotting version) Predictable as ever, Doctor.  
DALEK: Doctor.  
CAPTAIN: (Pirate Planet) Doctor.  
CYBERMAN: Doctor.  
DAVROS: Doctor.  
SONTARAN: Doctor.  
ZYGON: Doctor.  
BLACK GUARDIAN: Doctor, you shall die for this!  
(The Doctor makes it to a piece of antenna scaffolding, but cannot hold on. He
falls to the ground.  
The Master goes into his Tardis, laughing, and it dematerialises just before
the guards enter the control room.)

**[Below the antenna]**

(Adric, Nyssa and Tegan run to the Doctor, followed by guards. He is staring
up at the sky.)  
NYSSA: Doctor?  
TEGAN: Doctor?  
SARAH: Doctor?  
HARRY: Doctor.  
BRIGADIER: Doctor.  
LEELA: Doctor.  
K9: Doctor.  
ROMANA 1: Doctor.  
ROMANA 2: Doctor.  
ADRIC: Doctor. Doctor!  
DOCTOR: It's the end. But the moment has been prepared for.  
(The Doctor points to a ghostly white figure, that walks forward.)  
ADRIC: The Watcher.  
(The Watcher merges with the Doctor.)  
NYSSA: He was the Doctor all the time.  
(Tom Baker turns into the Watcher, then gains youthful features and short
straight hair. Peter Davison sits up.)  
  
---  
  
<Back to the episode listing

Doctor Who and related marks are trademarks of BBC . Copyright  1963,
Present. The web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment
purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

