**Demon Quest part one - The Relics of Time** **, by Paul Magrs**  

A BBC Audio Books Drama, released 2 September 2010  

DOCTOR [narrating]: I'm an almost perpetual traveller. I wander through the
vast star fields of the universe, I cross the bridges between dimensions, I
traipse the tow paths of Time. The galaxies are mine to range across forever
and a day. Sometime, though not often, I like to get away from it all, or at
least try to. There is a house in deepest darkest Sussex, it's name, Nest
Cottage. It has a housekeeper who tends the place when I'm travelling. Her
name is Wibbsey. She can be a bit of a handful, the poor dear. Mrs Wibbsey
doesn't really belong to the twenty century, but her duties are very light,
and she's settled well into village life. Next Christmas I was returning to
that quiet corner of the world after a year's absence. Snow clouds were
gathering in the sky, and I was quite unaware of the heavy weather Mrs Wibbsey
and I would soon have to face. Knowing her as I did by then, I'd have been
foolish to expect a warm welcome.  
  
DOCTOR: Ah ha ha. (tune of I'm ho-ome.)  
WIBBSEY: Oh, so you're back again, are you?  
DOCTOR: Oh. Just for a few days. I've promised the Tardis an overhaul, and
also I thought I should see how you were getting on.  
WIBBSEY: I see. Well, don't get under my feet. It's almost Christmas again.
Are you staying for the festivities?  
DOCTOR: Ah, remember last year?  
WIBBSEY: Hardly likely to forget it, am I. I was hoping it'd be quieter this
year, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: We'll just have to see, won't we.  
WIBBSEY: If you'll excuse me, I'm getting ready for the church bring and buy
sale, and we're very busy. It should have been last week, but the pipes burst
in the church hall, so now it's three days before Christmas and I'm run off my
feet.  
DOCTOR: Of course. Don't mind me.  
WIBBSEY: I suppose you'll be wanting supper.  
DOCTOR: I'd be a fool not to, glorious chef that you are.  
WIBBSEY: Hmm.  
DOCTOR: I'm pleased to see that you've settle in so well, away from your
actual time and place.  
WIBBSEY: Well, now that you mention it, when you've fixed up your time
machine, do you, do you think you could take me back there? To Cromer 1932?
Take me home.  
DOCTOR: Oh. This may sound harsh, Mrs Wibbsey, but there's nothing there for
you, back in the past. Your life is here now, at Nest Cottage.  
WIBBSEY: Oh. I thought so. I see. Well, never mind. Welcome back, Doctor.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: And so those few dark days before Christmas inched along.
Snow fell, and Mrs Wibbsey came and went, banging and clattering about with
boxloads of stuff from the attic and the cellar. I paid her little attention.  
  
WIBBSEY: What about this? Will you be needing _this_ any more?  
DOCTOR: What? No. I'm busy. Go away.  
WIBBSEY: Suit yourself.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: Meanwhile I was wholly concerned with the various
components from the Tardis console, which I had scattered about the parlour
and the dining room. Truth be told, I had been a little er (clears throat)
over-enthusiastic in some of my dismantling.  
  
WIBBSEY: That looks like a proper dog's dinner.  
DOCTOR: I know a dog who'd argue with that. Anyway, what would you know about
relative dimensional engineering?  
WIBBSEY: Nothing at all.  
DOCTOR: No.  
WIBBSEY: But I'd know better than to get marmalade in the workings.  
DOCTOR: Hmm? Ah. Oh.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: And with that, she was gone, down to the church hall in a
flurry of biscuit tins and eiderdowns. I continued to tinker in the warm glow
of the hearth fire, examining then reassembling each component of the Tardis
console. It was around about midday when I started to look for the spatial
geometer I'd earlier dismantled.  
  
DOCTOR: That's funny. I'm sure I put the pieces down here somewhere.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: I searched high and low, but it was only when my eyes fell
upon a broken teacup nestling amongst my high tech paraphernalia that my
suspicions began to grow.  
  
DOCTOR: Oh no. She hasn't, has she? Mrs Wibbsey! Mrs Wibbsey!  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: My scarf and coat tails flew as I dashed across the
village to the church hall. I was soon immersed in a sea of herringbone coats
and knitted hats, and the musty smell of sandalwood.  
  
WIBBSEY: Hello, Doctor. Come to find some new togs? There's a lovely cardigan
here.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: Mrs Wibbsey's stall was lavishly stocked, and mostly with
belongings of mine. What was more, she had already made twenty three pounds
fifty seven pence out of sundry artefacts.  
  
WIBBSEY: I did explain to you that cottage of yours was far too cluttered.  
DOCTOR: Everything comes in useful at some time or other, Mrs Wibbsey. Do you
hear me?  
WIBBSEY: I didn't think you'd miss any of this old rubbish.  
DOCTOR: You must let me be the judge of that. You have no idea what kinds of
things I'm storing at Nest Cottage. Things that should never see the light of
day. I mean. What's this doing here?  
WIBBSEY: New-fangled nonsense. I don't hold with gadgets.  
DOCTOR: Mrs Wibbsey, this is the cordless answerphone gadget I installed at
Nest Cottage last Boxing Day. It's important, and very cleverly souped up for
my own special purposes. Someone may try to get in touch with me.  
WIBBSEY: Keep your voice down. Deirdre whatsit's earwigging.  
DOCTOR: Never mind about Deirdre whatsit. I can't find a very important
component of the Tardis, and I have reason to believe you scooped its
component parts up and brought them here.  
WOMAN: How much is this, please?  
WIBBSEY: Two and six, dear.  
WOMAN: Eh?  
WIBBSEY: I mean er three pounds thirty seven.  
WOMAN: Oh. I'll take it.  
DOCTOR: That's my shaving mirror.  
WIBBSEY: You never use it. Thank you, dear.  
DOCTOR: Mrs Wibbsey, have you seen four perspex cylinders of varying size and
technical complexity?  
WIBBSEY: Oh, that set of coloured tubes? I thought they were porch lights.
Yes, this morning. A gentleman bought it. He said they'd make nice ornaments
for his conservatory.  
DOCTOR: Oh, give me patience.  
WIBBSEY: Well, I say bought them. In actual fact, we did a part exchange.  
DOCTOR: Was he someone from the village?  
WIBBSEY: No, actually, he was a funny looking fellow. I'd never seen him
before.  
DOCTOR: Mrs Wibbsey  
WIBBSEY: This bring and buy sale is in aid of the orphans, Doctor. I thought
you could spare a bit of old rubbish for the sake of the children.  
DOCTOR: This man, did he leave his name? Any details?  
WIBBSEY: Why would he do that? Look, here are the things he gave me, in this
bag. I haven't put them out yet. According to him, they're valuable antiques.  
DOCTOR: I can hardly bare to look.  
WIBBSEY: I have to say, it doesn't seem like anything very valuable. Mostly
papers. But he'd whistled off by the time I opened it.  
DOCTOR: With a vital component from the Tardis under his arm?  
WIBBSEY: Well, I'm sorry if I've done something wrong.  
DOCTOR: Wrong? My dear Mrs Wibbsey, I think you may have done something
absolutely catastrophic.  
WIBBSEY: Oh dear.  
DOCTOR: Now, gather up all this gubbins and help me carry it home.  
WIBBSEY: Oh. Deirdre, could you mind my stall for a minute.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: Back at the cottage, we examined the contents of the
stranger's bag.  
  
WIBBSEY: This is just rubbish, old bits of paper.  
DOCTOR: Hmm, it's certainly a rum quartet of items. An old book of fairy
tales, a poster of some kind, falling apart.  
WIBBSEY: What about this? Looks like a page torn out of a history book.  
DOCTOR: There's something attached to it. Ah, a piece of stone. How strange.
What a very peculiar thing to do. An actual piece of stone taped to the page.  
WIBBSEY: Oh, look, a mosaic.  
DOCTOR: What?  
WIBBSEY: The photograph at the bottom of the page. I used to love mosaics when
I was a girl. There was one in Cromer church. Oh, it says here it was dug up
from a Celtic settlement. Photograph shows a mosaic in the Roman style, first
century AD, blah, blah.  
DOCTOR: If I'm not mistaken, this piece of stone is a tile from that very
mosaic in the picture. Bright blue. How strange. But have you noticed the
oddest thing of all?  
WIBBSEY: I couldn't very well have missed it, could I? The mosaic is a picture
of you.  
DOCTOR: Thought I'd mention it in passing.  
WIBBSEY: Well, what's that all about? Have you been back there, meddling
around?  
DOCTOR: In the first century AD? Not recently. Oh dear, it does look a lot
like me, doesn't it.  
WIBBSEY: Look at this fourth item. Seems to be the cover of a small pamphlet
with some cartoon on the front. It's been ripped off.  
DOCTOR: It's not the only one. But there's more to this than simple daylight
robbery. At first glance, I'd say each of these items has been doctored to
feature my image. Someone has gone to a lot of trouble. Are you quite sure
there were only these four things in the bag, Mrs Wibbsey?  
WIBBSEY: Yes. Yes, quite sure. I'm so sorry, Doctor. I've given away your
spatial whatsit for a bag of practical jokes.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: I didn't say anything more just then to the disconsolate
Mrs Wibbsey, but these simple objects had aroused my curiosity. While she
returned to the jumble sale, I nipped out to the Tardis, which was waiting for
me in the back garden. I took with me all of the components of the console
plus the bag of papery artefacts. I sat up very late in the Tardis and chose
one of the objects from the bag, the page from the history book with the
picture of that curious mosaic. I examined the blue tile and let the Tardis's
navigational computer mull that one over. According to the photographs
accompanying the text, the mosaic had been discovered on a hill in West Sussex
during the summer of 1964\. There was something of a hoo-ha at the time
because it wasn't thought that the Celts had such skills with mosaics. It
seemed to have been assembled in the Roman style, around the time of the
second Roman invasion of Britain. Curiously, the piece didn't mention the
rather handsome subject depicted in his natty woollen scarf. It was quite a
flattering likeness, you know. I don't usually take a very good mosaic, but on
this occasion the artist had done a very good job. However, one morsel of
information the writer did impart sent an enormous shiver down my spine. The
settlement in which the mosaic was found showed other evidence of sacrifices
being made to a powerful goddess, whose name was Wibbsentia. I thought about
all of this for much of the night. These objects had been passed into the
hands of my housekeeper. Clearly I was supposed to take note of them. Could
they possibly be an archaic paper trail leading back into the past, hmm? The
next morning found Mrs Wibbsey struggling to open the back door of the
cottage, snow having fallen heavily in the night. She discovered me sitting at
the picnic table, so deep in thought that a layer of flakes had settled on my
hat and scarf.  
  
WIBBSEY: What on Earth are you doing, man? You'll catch your death out here.  
DOCTOR: You and I are going on a journey, Mrs Wibbsey.  
WIBBSEY: I'm not going anywhere except the shops, thank you very much.  
DOCTOR: Mrs Wibbsey, without the fragments of the component you bartered away
at jumble sale, the Tardis's movements, and therefore mine, are limited. We
can move freely in Time, but barely at all in Space. You have effectively
grounded me on Earth! Now, at the very least, I think you should do as you're
told. Don't you?  
WIBBSEY: But what do you want with me? What can I do?  
DOCTOR: This page from the history book. Please read what it says about where
the mosaic was found.  
WIBBSEY: I haven't got time for a history lesson, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Look here. A goddess called Wibbsentia.  
WIBBSEY: Oh!  
DOCTOR: Yes, Wibbsentia. It seems you're as much implicated in this
anachronism as I am. Now quickly, into the Tardis.  
WIBBSEY: You're not getting me inside that thing again.  
DOCTOR: Do you realise how few people are offered the chance to travel in the
Tardis with me? Now in, Wibbsentia.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: Once inside, I applied myself to setting coordinates on
the reassembled console. The mosaic tile had been very useful to the Tardis,
giving her something palpable to forge a link with across the centuries. She
could home in on its time-traces.  
  
WIBBSEY: The night you first brought me here from the past, I think I
pretended this Tardis of yours was just part of a dream.  
DOCTOR: The interesting thing about that mosaic is that I haven't been in that
era yet. Not in this body.  
WIBBSEY: Not in this body? Oh, you do say the most peculiar things.  
DOCTOR: Clearly, someone wants me, and you too, to visit now. This is nothing
more than a clever invitation, a summons, and hopefully a clue to the
whereabouts of that vital component.  
(The Tardis dematerialises.)  
WIBBSEY: Hey! We can't go now, I've left the back door open. The fire's on,
there's bread baking in the oven.  
DOCTOR: Too late for that, my Wibbsentia. Nest Cottage will have to look after
itself. Now, find something to hold onto. Without the spatial geometer, this
could be a rough journey.  
  
(The Tardis materialises and the door creaks open.)  
DOCTOR: Ah, here we are. Come on out, Mrs Wibbsey. Welcome to history. Look,
we're in the exact same spot nearly two thousand years earlier. Just taste
that air.  
WIBBSEY: Ooo, it's freezing.  
DOCTOR: Hmm. No wonder the Romans invented the duffel coat while they were
here.  
WIBBSEY: Deirdre had one on her stall. Wish I'd bought it now.  
DOCTOR: There's one in the Tardis locker. Go and put it on. We've a long
journey ahead.  
WIBBSEY: Where are we going?  
DOCTOR: To find the settlement on the hill, where that mosaic was created.
And, if we're lucky, to find the artist who created it, eh?  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: Soon we were off, tramping into the unspoiled countryside.  
(Creak of deep snow underfoot. Occasional cawing of corvids.)  
WIBBSEY: How do you know we're in the right year?  
DOCTOR: The Tardis has a very delicate nose for things like that, if you give
her enough to go on.  
WIBBSEY: All right then, that got us this far, but do you propose to find the
specific village?  
DOCTOR: The page from the history book give the location where the Celtic
settlement was dug up. I've correlated that with my pocket Ordnance Survey map
of Roman Britain, and here in my hand is a simple compass. Now, first of all
we have to find Stane Street, just off Baker Street.  
WIBBSEY: You're joking, of course.  
DOCTOR: You'll see. That is, if it's been built yet.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: We trekked through frosty fields and creaking woods. We
saw hardly any signs of human life, but deer and birds and rabbits roamed all
over the place. And as we sat down on a felled log with a meagre lunch of
berries and water from a stream, Mrs Wibbsey berated me for not allowing her
to bring proper supplies.  
  
WIBBSEY: We're not equipped for this. We're going to be found dead in the
middle of nowhere.  
DOCTOR: Hardly, Mrs Wibbsey. I do this sort of thing all the time. Jelly baby?
Take two, they're very nourishing.  
WIBBSEY: No thanks.  
DOCTOR: Oh.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: I had to hand it to the woman. Oh, she had some stamina.
That first day we walked for miles before we came to anything that resembled a
road or a track.  
  
DOCTOR: According to the map, it shouldn't be too far away now. We should be
thankful the mosaic wasn't dug up in Northumberland.  
WIBBSEY: It'd be easy just to disappear, wouldn't it, to get lost here in this
more simple time, and never go back home.  
DOCTOR: There's no such thing as a simpler time. Each age has its own
complications.  
WIBBSEY: There'd be none of this terrorism they all talk about in the village.
No money worries, no global economy or mugging or weapons of mass destruction.  
DOCTOR: Oh, you've been learning a lot, haven't you?  
WIBBSEY: Shh. Listen.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: I had been so caught up in her concerns that I failed to
hear what she had heard. The stirring of branches, the crumping of feet
through the frozen grass.  
  
DOCTOR: Oh! Get off!  
WIBBSEY: Don't hurt him. What are you doing? He's never done anything to you.
Who are you people?  
MAN: You can't stay out here. Night's approaching. You must come with us.  
WIBBSEY: You, you speak English.  
DOCTOR: Ow! Who hit me? If either of us was going to argue it would have been
her. What's going on?  
WOMAN: You will come. We have food and a place for you to sleep.  
WIBBSEY: Who are they, Doctor?  
DOCTOR: I don't know.  
WOMAN: Come, we must return to the encampment. The dark is rising.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: I believe they thought we were Romans, eccentrics who had
lost our way and wandered into their realm. I was fascinated by our would-be
hosts who appeared to belong to a Celtic tribe. They were covered in a rough
kind of make-up as if for disguise. Their clothing was also rough. In fact,
they were more barbaric than I would have expected for the period. But after
all, this was the deep countryside.  
  
DOCTOR: I think I read about you lot in Tacitus, though I did wonder how much
to believe.  
WIBBSEY: They're quite polite though, aren't they. Apart from hitting you on
the head.  
DOCTOR: Don't be complacent, Mrs Wibbsey. They're probably intending to eat us
or something. How do you feel about being put into a stew?  
WIBBSEY: I've been in one since the first day I met you.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: And just as the darkness descended completely, we arrived
at the tribe's small encampment. It was a shabby, primitive place. Straw-
thatched roofs on houses of wattle and daub, hens scratching about, and
everything centring about the largest structure, a kind of village hall, where
all the people crowded for warmth and sustenance.  
  
WIBBSEY: You do bring me to the nicest places, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Yes, we seem to have been derailed a bit, don't we.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: They were talking about us, these tribal folk, muttering
darkly and glancing our way. Word of our advent spread like wild fire, and
soon we were surrounded ragamuffin children and gnarled ancients, supposedly
wise ones. Also, the younger, burlier members of the tribe. All of them wanted
to see the strangers, the aliens.  
  
MAN: Are you Roman? Are you the ones from overseas? They say they're coming
again and again in waves, like they did almost a century ago, led by the one
they called Julius Caesar.  
DOCTOR: No, no, we're nothing to do with that lot. We're neighbours of yours,
or will be in two thousand years time. You've nothing to fear from us.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: As night set in they made us welcome at their meagre
feast. Hanks of roasted boar flesh and some kind of home-brewed ale which Mrs
Wibbsey wouldn't touch.  
  
WIBBSEY: There are things floating in it.  
DOCTOR: Shh, shh, shh. It's important for us to accept their hospitality
graciously, Mrs Wibbsey. These people are struggling to survive. They need
every drop of sustenance they can get. It's very kind of them to take us in.  
WIBBSEY: It's not very clean, history, is it.  
DOCTOR: Oh, you should see the future. I'm often getting my hands dirty, I'm
afraid.  
WOMAN: The elders have been conferring. They are intrigued by you. Some think
they recognise your type, your features and bearing, your strange apparel.  
DOCTOR: Oh, really? Who do they think I am?  
WOMAN: They're hoping you hail from the west, from the lost tribes, the
Druids, the magicians.  
DOCTOR: Oh, that's very flattering, but I'm afraid magic's not my thing.
Prognostication, fancy bangs and flashes calling up strange spirits? I'm
hopeless at all that sort of thing.  
WIBBSEY: I'm not so sure.  
DOCTOR: (sotto) Wibbsey, don't interfere.  
WIBBSEY: (sotto) If you tell them you're a Druid or whatever they want, they
might help us on our way.  
DOCTOR: Tell me, why do they hope we're Druids?  
WOMAN: Because that means you'll have special powers. That's the only reason
they'd have to keep you alive.  
DOCTOR: I see. Well, Mrs Wibbsey here is a marvel with the entrails of goats,
especially billy goats, ain't you, Wibbs.  
WIBBSEY: What?  
DOCTOR: (sotto) Your giblet gravy last Christmas.  
WOMAN: Will you help us with your magic?  
DOCTOR: Humour her, Mrs Wibbsey.  
WIBBSEY: I, I'll do what I can. Giblets indeed.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: I admired Mrs Wibbsey for the way she took everything in
her stride, even being led ceremonially into the centre of the village hall
and introduced to the whole community as a powerful High Priestess of the Old
Religion. It didn't phase her. We both realised that the prophecies of the
history books were quickly coming to life. And so when the villagers asked her
name, she merely followed its suggestion. She told them she had come among
them to portend the future, and their chances of survival this winter.  
  
MAN: Great Wibbsentia, we are honoured that you have favoured our small tribe
with your presence. We will reward you greatly for your efforts this night.  
WIBBSEY: I ask for little. Just that the Doctor and I be pointed in the right
direction and allowed to go on our way.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: I watched with great interest, wincing a little as they
slashed a goat's throat right in front of Mrs Wibbsey, and let the fresh blood
run into bronze goblets. Wibbsey went quite green as they slit open its belly
and dragged out all of its insides under her beaky nose. It might have been
nausea, or the billowing smoky incense, or, on the other hand, she might
actually have gone into a trance. Either way, her eyelids fluttered and she
swayed on the spot. Oh, bravo, Mrs Wibbsey, I thought. She looked just like a
genuine Druidic priestess in the midst of a ritual.  
  
MAN: What do you scry in the goat's liver and lights? Tell us their sacred
aspects, you wondrous entrail-gazer.  
WIBBSEY: I see, I see another tribe, very like you, not far from here, yet
they hate you and fear you. They have raided this village again and again,
killing and stealing. They are stronger than you, cleverer.  
MAN: Yes, yes, this is true.  
DOCTOR: Oh, well guessed, Wibbsey. Splendid.  
WIBBSEY: They take the best of the crops and livestock in this locality. You
will never defeat them. They have the upper hand. This is because they have
help. Someone, a great and powerful man, has been helping them in recent
months.  
MAN: Yes, we believe so. We have sent spies. Only one returned from their
encampment on the hill. Only one living witness returned to tell us.  
WIBBSEY: I can see it all. They have a great wizard whom they revere. A wizard
from abroad, who has with him a pet monster who guards their village. A huge
beast from another world. And the wizard is all-powerful. He will see to it
that you, the rivals of his tribe, are utterly destroyed.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: I thought Mrs Wibbsey was doing an incredible turn, very
authentic in the soothsayer stakes, but then, with this business about wizards
and monsters, I wondered if she wasn't going too far. The people around me
were gasping in shock and quivering in their fur-lined boots. And as for all
that stuff about destruction.  
  
WOMAN: She has spoken. Wibbsentia has shown us that we must strike out against
these enemies of ours. She has shown us the perils we face.  
WIBBSEY: Is, is that enough? Can I sit down now? I've come over a bit giddy.  
DOCTOR: Mrs Wibbsey, come over here and lie down. (sotto) That was quite
remarkable. Perhaps there's something in this scrying business after all.  
WOMAN: We must not despair. Wibbsentia has shown us only one possible outcome.
We will only be destroyed if we give in to the tribe on the hill and their
precious wizard. But now we have our own secrets. Today we have gained wizards
of our own.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: They went burbling on in this manner, but my attention was
on poor woozy Wibbsey.  
  
WIBBSEY: What did I say? It all came pouring out like gibberish. Did I give a
good impression?  
DOCTOR: A little too good. You've got them wanting to declare war on the next
tribe.  
WIBBSEY: Oh, no. I got the verse reading prize at school when I was a girl. I
didn't go all Henry the Fifth, did I?  
DOCTOR: Not quite, but you said some very strange things. Things which, if
they are true, you couldn't possibly have known.  
WIBBSEY: What?  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: There wasn't time to go into it then, but I was very
intrigued by Mrs Wibbsey's curious sensitivities. We were interrupted, rudely,
by a delegation from our hosts. They had rapidly made up their minds to offer
us a bargain. Our lives and freedom to go on with our quest as we wished, in
return for helping them. Helping them by visiting this other encampment on the
hill and executing the wizard and his monster.  
  
MAN: Well, Doctor, great Wibbsentia, what do you say?  
DOCTOR: Murder and execution aren't really my style.  
MAN: You will destroy them by fair means or foul, or magic if need be. If not,
we will sacrifice you both. The sacrifice of a Priestess and a Druid is very
potent.  
DOCTOR: At lease you're in a win win situation.  
MAN: It has been an auspicious day.  
DOCTOR: Very interesting about the word auspicious. It refers to bird
watching, you know, Wibbsey. Ancient peoples thought they could tell the
future by watching  
WOMAN: One of our elders observed the starlings this morning. He knew that
today would bring treasures for us, and here you are.  
DOCTOR: I see.  
WIBBSEY: We don't really have a choice, do we. We've got to do what they want,
and become assassins.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: They allowed us to rest that night, to sleep and marshal
our resources, but we had a miserable time of it, lying on that hard-packed
earth under heaps of rank and uncured skins. The dark air was murmurous, the
whole tribe seemed to snore. I sat up late thinking about that mosaic,
weighing up the small blue tile in the palm of my hand.  
  
WIBBSEY: I can't sleep like this. I keep thinking about the dangers we have to
face. Can't we just nip away, back to the Tardis?  
DOCTOR: We're inside the time line now, Mrs Wibbsey. We are part of the
unfolding events and we must stay to see it through. I have an appointment
with an unfinished work of art, a masterpiece from the ancient world.  
WIBBSEY: Even so, why can't we just nip out while this lot are asleep and go
about our own business.  
DOCTOR: Don't underestimate our hosts. Step out of line and you'll feel a
spear in your back. It wouldn't be long before they caught up with us. We must
do their bidding if we want to get free.  
WIBBSEY: I feel like we'll never get back to normality again.  
DOCTOR: But this _is_ normality, Mrs Wibbsey.  
WIBBSEY: I knew you'd say that.  
  
(Cockerel crows.)  
DOCTOR [narrating]: Dawn broke, and the shadows shifted, and someone was up
tending the great hearth in the centre of the village hall. I had been up all
night, mulling things over, thinking about wizards and monsters and Celtic
tribes and jumble sales and bundles of curious documents.  
  
WOMAN: Our elders believe it's best if you set off straight after breakfast.
The tribes forage in the daytime and their defences are at their lowest.  
DOCTOR: Your elders do all the deciding around here, don't they. Haven't you
heard of the youth vote?  
WOMAN: When you have killed the wizard, we will seize our chance. Our warriors
will attack their encampment.  
DOCTOR: I don't like the sound of that.  
WOMAN: You will do as the elders have commanded.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: In the morning light, the tribespeople looked even more
fearsome. It was a foetid old place, and we were relieved to be out in the
open and the cold morning air.  
  
WIBBSEY: Are they still watching us?  
DOCTOR: Keep walking quickly, Mrs Wibbsey. Just turn and give a hearty wave.
Arrivederci!  
WIBBSEY: Why didn't they send someone with us? Why do they trust us not to run
away?  
DOCTOR: I think they fear what this other tribe has got. None of them will go
anywhere near.  
WIBBSEY: Because they've got a wizard?  
DOCTOR: Magic can be a powerful thing to those who believe in it. Come on,
let's pick up our pace a bit.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: It took us a little while to negotiate the untamed stretch
of countryside that separated the two antagonistic tribes. We were going
through a dense thicket of trees when we made a gruesome discovery in the
undergrowth.  
  
WIBBSEY: I always imagined the Celts as more civilised, somehow. Not
squabbling like this between little gangs.  
DOCTOR: We've arrived at a time of great uncertainty. With the Romans about to
land in force, almost a hundred years after Julius Caesar's first visit,
things are about to become interesting. Some of the British tribes will work
with the Romans and be glad of their presence, others will resist with every
iota of their strength. For a few years, everything gets rather messy.  
WIBBSEY: I can't abide mess.  
DOCTOR: Mrs Wibbsey, don't look down.  
WIBBSEY: What is it?  
DOCTOR: I said don't look.  
WIBBSEY: Oh!  
DOCTOR: Corpses.  
WIBBSEY: They've just been left out here to rot.  
DOCTOR: I thought the Celtic tribes cremated their dead. They certainly didn't
just throw them down the hill like this.  
WIBBSEY: They look as if they've been here for years. They're all leathery.  
DOCTOR: Dessicated. Sucked dry. Hmm, a corpse-strewn copse. These bodies
haven't been here for years, Mrs Wibbsey. Look at their clothes. They're
dirty, but not ancient.  
WIBBSEY: Then what could have happened to these poor people? Oh, there's more
over there! There must be nearly twenty of them.  
DOCTOR: Their dress is too sophisticated for the place we've left. They must
come from our destination. Someone is killing them and hiding their remains.  
WIBBSEY: Who or what kills people like this?  
DOCTOR: Nothing in this age. I don't like this, Mrs Wibbsey. I don't like this
at all. Come on.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: It was easy to see where we needed to head for. Over the
tallest hill, plumes of ash grey smoke hung in the wintry sky. This encampment
looked more sophisticated than the one we had left.  
  
WIBBSEY: They're obviously richer and more organised than our poor lot. Look
at all this. It's a big city in comparison. It's like Norwich.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: We considered the best way to approach this startling
conurbation. We saw women, children and elderly people, livestock ambled
freely about the place, but still we approached with great caution.  
  
WIBBSEY: A few dead bodies down the hill is the least of their worries, I
suppose. You do realise this place will be under attack today, and we'll be
the cause of it?  
DOCTOR: (loudly) Good morning!  
WIBBSEY: Oh, here we go.  
DOCTOR: Hello, my dear. I wonder would you be so good as to take us to your
wizard. We've heard such wonderful things about him.  
WIBBSEY: Why do you always have to show off?  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: The young woman whom I'd asked seemed rather surprised by
our appearance. She started screaming, and gathering others about her, and all
at once the little boulevard we'd strayed into was awash with unwashed
figures. They shouted and prodded and poked at us. Dogs barked, babies cried.
I tried to smile and look harmless, but to no avail. I was getting the famous
Wibbsey stare from my housekeeper too. And then suddenly a new figure appeared
in their midst.  
  
WIZARD: Welcome, both of you.  
DOCTOR: I mean, if people don't understand simple good manners.  
WIBBSEY: Doctor, that old chap, he's talking to you.  
DOCTOR: What? Oh, hello. I'm the Doctor, and this is my curmudgeonly
housekeeper, Mrs Wibbsey.  
WIZARD: Have you come far?  
DOCTOR: Well, you see, your neighbours across the far side of the plain, they
sent us on a kind of mission.  
WIZARD: Then you've been very brave to come here.  
DOCTOR: It's quite amusing. We were sent here to assassinate or otherwise put
paid to this wizard fellow they've got holed up here. You don't happen to know
him, do you?  
WIZARD: Wizard, you say, hmm?  
WIBBSEY: Doctor, do you think that maybe this chap  
DOCTOR: I know, I know there's no such thing as wizards, and I dare say this
fellow is just some opportunist taking advantage of a primitive people,
perhaps impressing them with a spot of superior knowledge to gain precedence
in their little society, wouldn't you say, hmm?  
WIZARD: Oh, er, probably. Undoubtedly, sir.  
WIBBSEY: Do you think you could make the rest of your tribe back off? They're
being rather threatening.  
DOCTOR: Yes, We've been threatened by all sorts since we arrived in this
place. No one seems to like us.  
WIZARD: (showing a slight stammer) I'm a f-f-foreigner here myself. It takes a
little time to settle in amongst these island people.  
DOCTOR: How interesting. I can see you're different from the others.  
WIBBSEY: I was trying to point that out, Doctor. I think this man might be
their  
DOCTOR: You're their wizard, aren't you. Of course.  
WIZARD: Wizard? How ridiculous. I hate to be accused of b-b-b-building up my
own part. But come along, come along. My own small dwelling isn't far. You can
sit down and tell me all about this amusing mission of yours.  
DOCTOR: Lead on, Mac, oh no, that's not yet. What's that noise, by the way,
Mister, Mister.  
WIZARD: Oh, that's my elephant. Just my elephant. I stole her, you know, when
I absconded. Now come along, the two of you, into the warmth.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: It turned out he really did have an elephant. A tired
looking, shivery creature tethered to a tree near his tent.  
  
(Elephant trumpets.)  
DOCTOR: Hello, old cock. Ooo, you're a long way from home. You know, Mrs
Wibbsey, the Romans used elephants to attack cities when they were invading.
They brought them in ships to scare the natives.  
WIBBSEY: Oh, this one's days of scaring people are long over.  
WIZARD: Oh, she could still give you a run for your money. She's been a good
companion to me.  
DOCTOR: Perhaps I'll try it myself one day.  
WIBBSEY: So this is your monster, is it? The beast that the other tribe is so
scared of.  
DOCTOR: You haven't been letting her roam the countryside, scaring the Celts
to death, have you?  
WIZARD: She's stayed by my side for months.  
DOCTOR: It's just that we found some very strange remains hidden in the grass
at the bottom of the hill.  
WIBBSEY: Oh, horrible.  
DOCTOR: Human remains.  
WIZARD: How distressing for you. This is a very dangerous time, you know. One
can easily come a cropper in this barbarian land  
DOCTOR: Yes, I see.  
WIZARD: Their families were probably too busy to bury them. A savage time,
this is. People can't afford the niceties. Having said that, do come indoors
and have a drink.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: We followed the man into what appeared to be just another
rough built dwelling made of branches and skins, but inside we discovered what
seemed like a palace in comparison. There were carpets and wall-hangings, and
a few nick-nacks scattered about the place, all plainly Roman in origin.  
  
WIZARD: My humble abode.  
DOCTOR: How charming.  
WIZARD: Oh, don't mind Metafix over there. He's just finishing up for the day.
He's doing my f-f-f-f-f-floor for me.  
WIBBSEY: Oh, I say. Doctor.  
DOCTOR: Ah, a mosaic.  
WIZARD: Yes. Rather fine, isn't it? He's a very skilled worker, this boy. He's
picked up the rudiments of this kind of work very quickly. I'll make a Roman
craftsman of him yet.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: And so it seemed that we were in the right place after
all. The artist behind our history was in the process of putting together a
portrait of our new host, this apparent wizard.  
  
WIZARD: It's going to be rather fine, don't you think? I do like a nice
mosaic.  
DOCTOR: Amazing. It's going to be you, isn't it?  
WIZARD: Quite.  
DOCTOR: Well, I'm sure it'll be an excellent resemblance when he gets to your
actual face.  
WIZARD: You must have some of this. It's a kind of mulled wine.  
WIBBSEY: Doctor, we have to tell him. Listen, whoever you are, your people
here are in terrible danger.  
WIZARD: These are dangerous times.  
WIBBSEY: The other tribe, the ones who grabbed us, they're going to attack
your lot this afternoon, while the hunters are away foraging and the place is
defenceless.  
WIZARD: Ah, but these people have their wizard. Me. Everyone in these parts
fears the wizard, and his elephant.  
WIBBSEY: But we're meant to assassinate you. That's what we're here to do.  
WIZARD: Is it? Oh dear. Are you sure you're meant to have killed me?  
WIBBSEY: Well, of course, we're not actually going to do it.  
WIZARD: I'm relieved to hear it, Mrs Wibbsey. I've seen off a fair few
assassination attempts, you know. My family were famous for it. I've ducked
more slings and arrows than you've cooked hot dinners.  
DOCTOR: Still, it's a quandary, isn't it. The sundial is, well, not ticking
exactly. Those warriors we met clearly intend to attack the camp. Your little
idyll is under threat.  
WIZARD: Yes, my idyll, that's what it is. This is what I dreamed of for so
many years. S-s-s-s-slipping away quietly into retirement and obscurity.  
DOCTOR: Still rather stressful, though.  
WIZARD: Why do you say that?  
DOCTOR: Your stammer's returned.  
WIZARD: You know me?  
DOCTOR: By reputation, by the written records, and by the currency of your
Empire. Mrs Wibbsey, let me introduce to you the Emperor Claudius, ruler of
the known world, ruler of even this strange little backwater, Britain.  
WIBBSEY: Claudius? The Claudius?  
DOCTOR: Yes, indeed. I must say I'm surprised to find you here, your Majesty,
or Lord God, or your Imperial whatever it is you like to be called. If my
knowledge of these times is correct, you shouldn't be here at all. There's
nothing in the history books about your hiding away in a village for months on
end.  
WIZARD: I can see there's no use in protesting, Doctor er, whoever you are.
The game's up. You've found me out. I don't know, er, what these books are you
speak of, but the fact is, I've been a little naughty. It was back in the
spring, you see. I was heading north with my retinue. We were galloping along
on the new road, an easy fifty miles a day. But then I pulled a f-f-f-f-fast
one, didn't I. The Claudians have always been very nimble thinkers, very
tricky souls. I gave the others the slip, even with an elephant in tow, my
loyal c-c-c-c-companion. I managed to get away. They're quite lost without me,
but what do I care? I just fancied a quiet life.  
WIBBSEY: But surely you can't just stop being Emperor?  
WIZARD: Why not? It's a ghastly job. I'm sick of that treacherous lot. I'm
quite happy here, thank you. The Britons will look after me, so long as they
think I'm a wizard and can be of some use. But I've had quite enough of the
back-stabbing nastiness of Rome.  
WIBBSEY: But history doesn't go like that. That isn't how it happens.  
DOCTOR: You tell him, Mrs Wibbsey. You're doing very well.  
WIBBSEY: What? Oh, I can't believe all this is happening.  
DOCTOR: I'm afraid she's right, Claudius. You were only here in Britain for
sixteen days, you know. You've already outstayed yourself. And once you've
gone home, your invaders get on with it on your behalf. Your people are here
for hundreds of years, building roads, inventing central heating, generally
modernising the old place.  
WIZARD: Surely these are just prophecies. They can be avoided, with c-c-c-
care.  
DOCTOR: No. History is history, and you're standing in the way.  
WIZARD: Oh, let us not worry ourselves about all that now. I want to show you
the room next door.  
DOCTOR: Claudius, you and your elephant can't just sit with your heads in the
mud.  
WIZARD: Why not?  
DOCTOR: Well, for one thing, because your nearest neighbours are about to
destroy this village, and they will too. They are desperate, starving. This
tribe of yours, they're softer, better fed. They won't stand a chance.  
WIZARD: I've become rather fond of them, you know. I've taught them better
ways to cultivate the rough soil, given them more efficient tools.  
DOCTOR: You mustn't interfere. You should let these people get on with their
lives, and return to your own lot.  
WIZARD: Who are you to tell me what to do?  
DOCTOR: Now don't get all imperious.  
WIZARD: Just because you claim to have seen this future world in which Rome
invades the British Isles doesn't mean I can't do exactly as I please.  
WIBBSEY: But it's one of the basic facts about this country. It happened. If
you prevent it, I don't know what will happen.  
DOCTOR: If Claudius here treats Britain as his retirement home, everything
will change. Everything.  
WIBBSEY: Go on, Doctor. Prove to him we've come from the future.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: In exasperation I dug through my capacious coat pockets
for something to do the trick. However, my sonic screwdriver failed to impress
the haughty Emperor with its polite whirr. Neither did he take much interest
in a timetable for the Martian shuttle bus, or a Cornish pasty with a sell by
date of March the twelfth 1980. My last ditch attempt to impress him centred
around the answerphone gadget from Nest Cottage, the one I'd rescued from the
jumble sale table. It was right at the bottom of my deep overcoat pockets.  
  
WIZARD: So what does this one do?  
DOCTOR: You know all about sibyls and portents and prognostications, don't
you? Well, this incredible device talks with the voice of the future.  
WIZARD: Well, well, well. And it even lights up.  
DOCTOR: It brings messages from the heavens, that is, if there's anything on
it.  
(There is a message after the beep.)  
YATES [OC]: Hello there, Mrs Wibbsey. And Doctor, if you're there too. Just a
quick message to say I'm at a loose end this Christmas and so I thought I'd
drop in and see you. As a matter of fact, I rather hoped you'd be expecting
me. Oh, and I'll be bringing Captain with me too. (barking) Captain, down,
Captain. All being well, I'll be arriving by the two thirty train on the
twenty third of December. Who'd have thought it was a year since  
(Beep!)  
DOCTOR: I think the tape ran out. He always did talk too much.  
WIBBSEY: So that's one more to cook for.  
WIZARD: Well, well. It is, as you say, quite m-miraculous. (sotto) No doubt
it'll all be on microchip one day.  
DOCTOR: What did you say?  
WIZARD: Oh, I said er that voice, it's like the voice of a s-s-sibyl.  
DOCTOR: I'll remember to tell him.  
WIBBSEY: Do you believe us now, that we come from the future.  
WIZARD: It seems I must believe you, though of course it is incredible. But
still, now that we have that cleared up, let me show you around my palace.
I'll be back in a jiffy.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: It wasn't exactly the reaction I'd expected. He just
wandered off into an antechamber and had a man servant bring us wine and fruit
and cheese for an early lunch. It was quite a good spread.  
  
WIBBSEY: You can see that this tribe is much better off than the other one. No
wonder they're so jealous.  
DOCTOR: The catering is definitely better. We have to impress upon him the
danger, Mrs Wibbsey. He's doddering about like he just doesn't care. They're
vulnerable. If Claudius gets killed here today, we don't stand a chance of
getting history back on track.  
WIBBSEY: He seems to think he's invulnerable. You know, he reminds me of
someone. I can't put my finger on it.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: The attack was beginning. There came distant cries and
screams. The warriors of the other tribe were laying siege to the settlement
on the hill. The noise grew in pitch and ferocity. They were assuming we had
fulfilled our side of the bargain, and that the wizard was dead. I went
outside to watch. The elephant stirred and whimpered. She was no kind of
monster. She'd be no use in battle, that was obvious. Her fighting days were
through. Presently Claudius joined me.  
  
WIZARD: They're coming! You're right. Come back inside. We'll be safe there.  
DOCTOR: We're not just going to sit it out, man.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: Mrs Wibbsey had been wandering around inside, and just
then came hurrying out clutching something.  
  
DOCTOR: What on Earth have you got there?  
WIBBSEY: I was poking around, as you do, and I found this.  
WIZARD: Please, come inside. We haven't a moment to spare!  
WIBBSEY: Another bit of your whatsit, that thingy, you know.  
DOCTOR: It's a piece of my spatial geometer. A little tiny bit, but how did it
come to be here?  
WIBBSEY: Oi! Come back here!  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: Our host had suddenly darted back into his abode. In
amongst all the hullabaloo of the approaching army and the screams of the
villagers, the Emperor had seen fit to sneak away. My first priority was to
avert further death and disaster. I dispatched Mrs Wibbsey to talk to Claudius
and pocketed the precious fragment of the Tardis component. Then I strode out
bravely into the encampment towards the very source of all that murderous
noise.  
  
DOCTOR: Stop! You must stop at once!  
MAN: Stay back, Druid.  
DOCTOR: What are you doing? These are defenceless people, your own people. How
are they any different to you? They live on a hill, you live on the plain.
Aren't you just the same? Why can't you share the things you have? What's
wrong with you people?  
MAN: They sought help from the magician you've slain.  
DOCTOR: Er, well, actually  
WOMAN: The magician and his monster still live! Kill the Druid. Kill him along
with the rest.  
DOCTOR: Wait! I have something to show you in this magic box.  
MAN: You have already shown that your powers are false.  
DOCTOR: Listen! This box contains the voice of one of the gods. He would be
most displeased to witness any more killing today. If you cease your bloody
activities right now, he will promise to visit you in person for your
midwinter festival. He will bring his Hound of Hell with him to contend with
any warrior with bloodlust in his heart. Listen to this. Just give the volume
a nudge.  
YATES [OC]: Just a quick message to say I'm at a loose end this Christmas and
so I thought I'd drop in and see you. As a matter of fact, I rather hoped
you'd be expecting me. Oh, and I'll be bringing Captain with me too. (barking)
Captain, down, Captain.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: I must say my little wheeze worked a second time quite
brilliantly, and all down to Mike Yates. Who would have thought it'd be so
effective. The warriors decided almost immediately to behave themselves. They
suddenly saw the sense in what I was saying. They were ashamed of themselves,
dashing about slaughtering women and children and old folk, It was time for
the midwinter festival, and they had much jollier things to prepare than
massacre.  
  
DOCTOR: Goodbye! Happy solstitial rites! Now, let's see how Mrs Wibbsey's
getting on with that absent Emperor. Wibbsentia, are you there?  
WIBBSEY: Shh. Come here. His nibs has nipped into that little antechamber next
door. Think he must have been caught short.  
DOCTOR: Ahem. Claudius? Er, your Royal Highness, or whatever it is you like to
be called.  
WIBBSEY: He won't come out. I've tried. Perhaps we scared him with our
knowledge of the future.  
DOCTOR: I'd like to know how he got his hands on that bit of my spatial
geometer.  
WIZARD [OC]: Why don't you step through here? I've been dying to show you this
room.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: We followed the sound of his voice behind a velvet
curtain, from beyond which emanated a murky green light.  
  
WIZARD: I'm sorry, Doctor, Mrs Wibbsey. I've put you to a great deal of
trouble, and it isn't over yet.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: The room beyond was decorated in the fashion of the royal
palaces of the Forum in Rome, with a marble floor and even more elaborate
mosaics than that which Metafix was creating.  
  
WIZARD: My home from home.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: The curious background noise grew louder. We found we were
having to raise our voices.  
  
WIBBSEY: It's not another blooming Tardis, is it?  
WIZARD: If only, Mrs Wibbsey, if only.  
DOCTOR: Mrs Wibbsey, get out of here.  
WIBBSEY: I'm not going without you.  
DOCTOR: I know. I'm coming as well.  
WIZARD: Wait! Come back, Doctor. You're supposed to come with me.  
DOCTOR: He's trying to kidnap us. Now move!  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: We dived back through the velvet curtain, and suddenly
(dematerialisation noise)  
  
WIBBSEY: He's gone. That whole funny room is gone.  
DOCTOR: Mmm, yes. Who knows where to?  
WIBBSEY: Was he really Claudius?  
DOCTOR: I don't know, yet, but this business isn't finished by a long chalk.  
WIBBSEY: That sounds ominous.  
DOCTOR: Oh, it's very ominous indeed, Mrs Wibbsey. What was a piece of my
Tardis doing in Roman Britain, eh? Why did Claudius first pretend not to know
about the future and then try to kidnap us in a dematerialisation chamber?  
WIBBSEY: And if he's scarpered to fairy land what's going to happen to history
now?  
DOCTOR: Ah, look, here's our mosaic artist. Metafix, old chap, you might want
to have a little think before finishing that thing. Your subject has just
scarpered without paying.  
WIBBSEY: Hmm, I wonder who he'll replace him with.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: I gave Metafix the single blue tile that had been affixed
to the page from the history book.  
  
WIBBSEY: The very blue of your eyes.  
DOCTOR: Oh, I never really looked, Mrs Wibbsey. I just thought Metafix might
like to pay tribute to our work here today.  
WIBBSEY: History in the making, eh?  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: But even before we could get outside, we noticed the
mosaic artist angrily dismantling his work. He obviously didn't lay tiles for
the love of it. It seemed I wouldn't be remembered in baked clay after all.
The page from the history book with its flattering photograph had been a fake,
yet someone had sent it to me along with an actual tile from this very moment
in time. That mystery remained, along with certain others. Outside, we basked
for a moment in the newly declared peace between two British tribes. They were
mingling and pledging allegiances to each other, and I felt rather proud of a
job well done.  
  
WIBBSEY: Oh, we've got a long walk back to the Tardis, haven't we. (elephant
trumpet) What the?  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: We hurried round to the paddock, and found Claudius's
elephant being menaced by a selection of hungry warriors from both tribes. The
poor dear was shivering, her eyes filled with alarm.  
  
DOCTOR: What is it with the British? First sign of decent weather and they
want to have a barbecue.  
WIBBSEY: Oh, we have to save her. We can't leave her with this lot.  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: I would like to be able to say that Mrs Wibbsey and I
leapt bravely to Nellie's defence by jumping straight upon her back and
galloping down the hill and out of that place, that we made the tribesmen
scatter, and that we burst down the barriers and off we went, thundering into
the distance across the frozen wastes of ancient Britain. But in reality, we
had a bit of a quarrel with the warriors, after which I offered around some
placatory aniseed balls, and I eventually convinced them that eating a whole
elephant would give them chronic indigestion. After that, Mrs Wibbsey and I
led poor Nellie out of that camp at something rather less than a gallop. More
of a stately amble, really. She was getting on a bit, the dear.  
  
WIBBSEY: Where are we going to set her free?  
DOCTOR: If the Tardis was working properly, we could take her somewhere warm.
As it is, she'll simply have to put up with the chilly weather in a friendlier
age.  
WIBBSEY: Are you taking us back into the future?  
DOCTOR: I hope so. (unintelligible) a small one. Perhaps she'll join us on our
travels, Mrs Wibbsey. What do you think? She'd be hopeless getting into
ventilation shafts, of course.  
WIBBSEY: You're talking nonsense again, Doctor.  
DOCTOR: I know. Marvellous, isn't it.  
(Mrs Wibbsey sighs.)  
  
DOCTOR [narrating]: And on we walked for miles and miles with Nellie at our
side. We considered those other papers and artefacts that Mrs Wibbsey had been
given at the jumble sale.  
  
WIBBSEY: It's a trail of clues, isn't it, deliberately placed.  
DOCTOR: It's looking likely, but to what end? What was the poster _of_ , Mrs
Wibbsey? Do you remember?  
WIBBSEY: It was that Frenchie thing, whatsit, that famous cabaret poster.  
DOCTOR: Ah yes, Aristide Bruant dans son cabaret in Montmartre, Mrs Wibbsey.
Paris 1894, that's our next stop.  
WIBBSEY: What, with Nellie here?  
DOCTOR: We'll find a zoo en route in the nineteenth century. We'll pop forward
and drop Nellie off, then board the boat train across the Channel. What do you
say, Wibbs?  
WIBBSEY: My head's in a whirl.  
DOCTOR: We could be in Montmartre for supper, Mrs Wibbsey. How'd you feel
about another night off from your chores?  
WIBBSEY: I could do with a month off.  
DOCTOR: No time for that, we're only just starting. Come along, I know this
wonderful place, the Moulin Rouge. Ever heard of it?  
WIBBSEY: Don't you ever stop?  
DOCTOR: Hardly ever. Come along!  
  
---  
  
<Back to the 4th Doctor episodes

Doctor Who and related marks are trademarks of BBC . Copyright  1963,
Present. The web pages on this site are for educational and entertainment
purposes only. All other copyrights property of their respective holders.

